Integrating FATE/Critical Data Studies into Data Science Curricula: Where are we going and how do we get there?
Jo Bates1, David Cameron1, Alessandro Checco1, Paul Clough1, 2, Frank Hopfgartner1, Suvodeep
Mazumdar1, Laura Sbaffi1, Peter Stordy1, and Antonio de la Vega de León1
1 University of Sheffield
Sheffield, UK
2 Peak Indicators
Chesterfield, UK
ABSTRACT
There have been multiple calls for integrating topics related to fair-
ness, accountability, transparency, ethics (FATE) and social justice
into Data Science curricula, but little exploration of how this might
work in practice. This paper presents the findings of a collabora-
tive auto-ethnography (CAE) engaged in by a MSc Data Science
teaching team based at University of Sheffield (UK) Information
School where FATE/Critical Data Studies (CDS) topics have been a
core part of the curriculum since 2015/16. In this paper, we adopt
the CAE approach to reflect on our experiences of working at the
intersection of disciplines, and our progress and future plans for
integrating FATE/CDS into the curriculum. We identify a series of
challenges for deeper FATE/CDS integration related to our own
competencies and the wider socio-material context of Higher Edu-
cation in the UK. We conclude with recommendations for ourselves
and the wider FATE/CDS orientated Data Science community.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Social and professional topics → Computing education.
KEYWORDS
data science, FATE, critical data studies, higher education
ACM Reference Format:
Jo Bates1, David Cameron1, Alessandro Checco1, Paul Clough1, 2, Frank
Hopfgartner1, Suvodeep Mazumdar1, Laura Sbaffi1, Peter Stordy1, and An-
tonio de la Vega de León1. 2020. Integrating FATE/Critical Data Studies into
Data Science Curricula: Where are we going and how do we get there?. In
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* ’20), Jan-
uary 27–30, 2020, Barcelona, Spain. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372832
1 INTRODUCTION
The number of Data Science degrees has expanded significantly in
the last five years (e.g., [9]), largely in response to growing demand
from employers for data literate graduates. Despite disciplinary
differences, in general terms Data Science is understood to be “the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
FAT* ’20, January 27–30, 2020, Barcelona, Spain
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6936-7/20/02. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372832
computational and quantitative analysis of large datasets to create
information and knowledge” (p. 3) using scientifically rigorous
methodologies, frameworks and tools [21].
Alongside this expansion in Data Science degrees, there have
been increasing calls for Data Science curricula to embed train-
ing in topics related to Fairness, Accountability, Transparency and
Ethics (FATE) e.g., [10, 18], as well as to develop students’ crit-
ical awareness of the power dynamics and potential social con-
sequences of applied Data Science as examined in Critical Data
Studies (CDS) [3, 19]. Such calls echo growing concerns among
academics, developers, policy makers and the public about the indi-
vidual and societal consequences of existing and emergent forms
of applied Data Science.
Since 2015/16, the authors of this paper (the MSc Data Science
programme team based at the University of Sheffield, UK) have been
actively engaged in a multi-disciplinary collaboration that works
to embed FATE/CDS topics into the delivery of a Data Science
Masters programme. In this paper, we report the findings of a
collaborative auto-ethnography [5] that our teaching team engaged
in with the aim of taking stock of our efforts so far, reflecting on
our approach to working at the intersection of disciplines and how
this influences how FATE/CDS are integrated into our curriculum,
and what challenges and opportunities there are for deepening this
integration in future years.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we first provide
a literature review to set our work into context. In Section 3, we
outline the research methodology of our work and present our main
findings in Section 4. Section 5 concludes this work.
2 BACKGROUND
2.1 The Growth of Data Science Degrees
The process of datafication that can be observed in many sectors
over the last decade has led to an, as yet unsatisfied, demand for
skilled data specialists across industry and the public sector. Within
the domain of higher education, rapid curriculum change aimed at
addressing these workforce needs can be observed within a num-
ber of specialisms, including Information Schools and Computer
Science [21, 27]. DeVeaux et al.’s 2017 paper [9, p. 2] reports 530
programmes in Data Science and related fields taught at over 200
universities worldwide, and the ACMData Science Task Force [10, p.
11] predicts the number of programmes and the number of students
wanting to study them will increase.
Song and Zhu’s [26] analysis of 42 undergraduate and postgrad-
uate Data Science programmes in the US observed more Masters
than Bachelors degrees, and that Information Science departments
offered the largest number of programmes, followed by depart-
ments of Computer Science and Statistics. During 2015–17, the 65
iSchools that made up the iSchool consortium offered a total of 87
data-related degrees, and 26 of these were data specific degrees of-
fered at Masters level, half of which were Data Science degrees [21,
p. 5]. As Ortiz-Repiso et al. [21] observe, that Information Schools
have moved in this space is unsurprising given “core processes of in-
formation science (collecting, organising, managing, accessing and
supporting the use and manipulation of information) are acutely
relevant to data-driven disciplinary areas such as data science” (p.
1).
Within the emerging literature on Data Science curricula, there is
a clear distinction between Information Science and Computer Sci-
ence driven approaches to the subject: “Computer Science teaches
computing with more emphasis on fundamental elements such as
data structures, algorithms, computational theory, and computing
models. On the other hand, information computing in iSchools
should emphasize users, tools, and applications” (p. 6)[27, p. 6].
This difference maps well onto the distinction Tierney [30] makes
between Type 1 (technical experts) and Type 2 data scientists who
have some knowledge of a variety of Data Science techniques,
but are more orientated towards user needs, acting as a transla-
tor “between the business problem and the technical environment
necessary to deliver what is needed”.
The multi-disciplinary nature of iSchools — and their emphasis
on the interrelations between information, people and technology
— Song and Zhu [27] argue makes them well placed to “educate
successful data scientists equipped with diverse skills with broad
perspectives... probably the most ideal institutions for teaching
user-based and application-focused data science education” (p. 6);
a perspective echoed by Ortiz-Repiso et al. [21].
2.2 FATE/CDS in Data Science Curricula
Despite these potential strengths of the iSchools in delivering a
FATE/CDS oriented Data Science curriculum, there is little engage-
ment with these issues within the existing research literature. In
the discipline’s educational literature on Data Science, FATE/CDS
topics tend to receive little more than a mention in a list of relevant
topics:
“Most iSchool curricula emphasize concepts such as. . . social
aspects of information such as ethics of big data and
data science, security and privacy issues” [27, p. 8]
“Data science has greater variety than big data analyt-
ics, with courses such as the semantic web, metadata,
data curation, cognitive science and datamanagement,
and ethics” [21, p. 12].
Further, some in the field have observed that while Library and
Information Science has much to offer, too often as iSchools have
shifted towards offering Data Science and related programmes their
social orientation “has been steadily eroded in favor of the same
harvesting, hoarding, mining and manipulation that were once the
exclusive domain of computer science programs” [15].
A similar level of engagement with FATE/CDS topics is observed
in the wider non-LIS research on Data Science curricula e.g., Wilder
and Ozgur [32] and Anderson et al. [2]. Whereas in some accounts
FATE/CDS topics are noticeably absent e.g. Baumer’s [4] description
of an experimental Data Science curriculum at a US institution.
This body of research reflects the results of a recent ACM [10]
international academic survey about Data Science curricula which
discovered only 54% of Data Science programmes required content
on ethics, with no other socially orientated topics identified, and
only 65.5% had a Data Science in context requirement (a component
in which ethical considerations may have been necessary).
As the number of Data Science programmes offered by univer-
sities has increased, there have been various efforts to establish
model curricula and a set of common competencies at undergradu-
ate and postgraduate levels (e.g., [6, 9, 10, 18]). In this paper, we will
not elaborate on the technical aspects of these competency frame-
works, only to observe a difference in the depth of computational
and mathematical knowledge expected within proposals emerging
from different disciplines. Our interest in this paper is the emphasis
on competencies relating to FATE/CDS within these frameworks
and proposed curricula.
With a specific focus on iSchool Data Science curriculum devel-
opment, Song and Zhu [26, 27] argue that iSchools should take ad-
vantage of their existing emphasis on social aspects of information.
However, despite their acknowledgement of the iSchools’ strengths
in this area, there is no mention of FATE/CDS topics in their paper
“Big Data and Data Science: what should we teach?” [26].
The European EDISON Data Science Model Curriculum pub-
lished in 2017 (release 2), on the other hand, does include considera-
tion of “ethical issues” across a range of different competencies, and
also more specifically the importance of “responsible data use, data
privacy, ethical principles, legal issues” [6, p. 61]. However, there is
no mention of bias, transparency, fairness, justice or the potential
social implications of some forms of Data Science practice.
Similarly, the US-based Business Higher Education Forum ar-
gued that Data Governance and Ethics, framed as “Identifying data
governance obligations and challenges and emerging legal and ethi-
cal data privacy and security best practices and uncertainties within
a given context” [11, p. 5], should be a core competency for Data
Science graduates.
Around the same time, faculty participants in the US-based Park
City initiative observed that given the new ethical challenges posed
by Data Science capabilities, curricula should “feature exposure
to and ethical training in areas such as citation and data owner-
ship, security and sensitivity of data, consequences and privacy
concerns of data analysis, and the professionalism of transparency
and reproducibility” [9, p. 9]. Nonetheless, while such challenges
are recognised these topics are absent from the proposed course
structure.
More recently, the US-based National Academies of Sciences, En-
gineering, andMedicine (NASEM)’s [18, p. 3] work on “envisioning”
an undergraduate Data Science curricula, recommends that:
“A key goal is to give all students the ability to make
good judgments, use tools responsibly and effectively,
and ultimatelymake good decisions using data. . . Ethics
is a topic that, given the nature of data science, stu-
dents should learn and practice throughout their ed-
ucation. Academic institutions should ensure that
ethics is woven into the data science curriculum from
the beginning and throughout.”
Building upon these various efforts to map out competencies for
Data Science students, the ACM Data Science Task Force’s 2019
draft guidance [10] goes further, addressing a number of FATE-
relevant topics that graduates ought to be able to demonstrate
competency in. These include: privacy and confidentiality, legality,
intellectual property, transparency and accountability in algorithms,
and techniques for establishing whether a dataset or algorithm is
biased. The report also observes:
“Students of Data Science need to be imbued with the
‘joy of data’, seeing data as the ’currency or fuel of our
time’. They also need to be imbued with a strong sense
of professional and ethical responsibility. Data Science
courses ought to reflect such sentiments; likewise the
education of data scientists” [10, p. 14].
It is evident that there is a growing recognition of the neces-
sity to embed FATE/CDS related topics into Data Science curricula.
However, as Leonelli [16] observes, research on integrating ethical
safeguards into Data Science practice is relatively limited in scope,
noting a particular focus on issues of consent. This observation
is somewhat echoed in the frameworks outlined above, with rec-
ommendations tending to focus on compliance with ethical and
legal frameworks, and notions of transparency and accountability.
Leonelli stresses that while these concerns are important the focus
“sidesteps two crucial ethical issues”: (1) the “implications of large-
scale data integration on social groups and communities whose
characteristics and identity are sometimes easily retrievable”, and
(2) how Data Scientists “could and/or should be made accountable
for the decisions they take in their work” [16, p. 2-3].
Leonelli’s concerns begin to touch upon wider trends within
Critical Data Studies and cognate fields, which have tended to em-
phasise the power dynamics of emergent data practices through
concepts such as ‘Data Justice’ [7, 28], ‘Data Power’ [13], ‘Algo-
rithms of Oppression’ [20], and ‘Data Feminism’ [8]. These under-
standings have been advanced by scholars in the social sciences
and humanities who have argued that the societal implications of
applied Data Science are better addressed through frameworks cen-
tred upon understandings of power, justice, oppression, rather than
the more technically ‘resolvable’ issues of ethics, bias, transparency
etc. It is such an approach that scholars such as Bates et al. [3] and
Neff et al. [19] have called for in their arguments for embedding
Critical Data Studies within Data Science curricula.
While the above literature evidence a range of calls for embed-
ding FATE/CDS into Data Science curricula, as yet there is a lack
of literature on what this might mean in practice, and what the
challenges are of building multi-disciplinary teams capable of deliv-
ering high-quality teaching that integrates both the technical and
social justice dimensions of Data Science. The following sections
will go on to describe how our team, based at the Sheffield Informa-
tion School, have approached this issue since launching our Data
Science programme in academic year 2014/15.
2.3 Sheffield Information School’s Data Science
Programme
The Data Science programme delivered by the Information School
at University of Sheffield is a one-year full time Master of Science
degree, which can also be studied part time over two years. The
Information School, and therefore the Data Science programme, are
based in the Faculty of Social Sciences. The programme explicitly
aims to train “Type 2” Data Scientists; that is data scientists who
have some knowledge of a variety of data science techniques, but
are more orientated towards the user needs, acting as a transla-
tor “between the business problem and the technical environment
necessary to deliver what is needed” [30]. The programme was
launched in 2014/15, and has experienced significant growth in
student numbers since its inception. As shown in Table 1, this
growth in student numbers is based on increased recruitment of
international students, particularly Chinese students.
Year Number Fee status
2014/15 20 7 UK; 2 EU; 11 INT
2015/16 42 10 UK; 2 EU; 30 INT
2016/17 47 20 UK; 4 EU; 23 INT
2017/18 59 10 UK; 2 EU; 47 INT
2018/19 110 9 UK; 4 EU; 97 INT
Table 1: Numbers and fee status of registered students
The course is 180 credits, made up of 15 credit ‘modules’ and a
45-credit dissertation. Some of these modules are compulsory (core)
and others are optional (electives). The initial and current module
structure is presented in Table 2. The ‘Data and Society’ module
is the most FATE/CDS relevant module. It is a core module that
runs in the 1st semester. It is taught from a Critical Data Studies
perspective, and adopts a constructivist pedagogy to explore issues
relating to:
• Conceptualisations of power, structure and agency and how
they relate to Data Science and the production of knowledge;
• Philosophical debates related to production of knowledge
from data;
• Politics of data visualisation and algorithmic processing (e.g.
bias, transparency, surveillance etc);
• Data citizenship and agency;
• Legal aspects of processing personal data (GDPR);
• Ethical reasoning for data science practice applying insights
from the above topics.
The growth in student numbers has also meant an increase and
diversification of academic staff teaching on the programme since
2014/15. As seen in Table 3, the composition of the teaching team
is diverse in disciplinary background.
2.4 Working at the intersection of disciplines
The literature points to significant advantages for students in being
exposed to ideas and knowledge from differing disciplinary and
cultural perspectives. Learning is understood to be “trigger[ed]”
in the ‘third-spaces’ at the boundaries of disciplines, cultures and
2014/15 (first year) 2019/20
Introduction to Data Science (15
credits)
Introduction to Data Science (15
credits)
Data Analysis (15 credits) Data Analysis (15 credits)
Information Retrieval: Search
Engines and Digital Libraries (15
credits)
Data Visualisation (15 credits) –
core from 2019/20
Data Mining and Visualisation (15
credits)
Data Mining (15 credits)
Database Design (15 credits) Database Design (15 credits)
Research Methods and Dissertation
Preparation (15 credits)
Data and Society (15 credits) – core
from 2016/17
Dissertation (45 credits) Research Methods and Dissertation
Preparation (15 credits)
Dissertation (45 credits)
Plus 3 from: Plus 2 from:
Researching Social Media Researching Social Media
Information Governance Information Governance and Ethics
Business Intelligence Business Intelligence
Information Systems in
Organisations
Digital Advocacy (option from
2016/17)
Research Data Management Big Data Analytics (option from
2016/17)
Information Systems Modelling User-Centred Design and
Human-Computer Interaction
(option from 2018/19)
Table 2: Core and elective modules in 2014/15 & 2019/20
social groups [1, 14]. The Information School’s Data Science pro-
gramme with its multi-disciplinary team and curriculum, and in-
ternational cohort of students and staff, is therefore well situated
in relation to opportunities for activating such forms of learning
among our students. Further, a significant amount of the litera-
ture on researching and teaching at the intersection of disciplines
emphasises institutional barriers related to the administrative chal-
lenges, departmental organisation, physical space etc [17]. Again,
our programme is well positioned in relation to such challenges
given the multi-disciplinary team are co-located within a single de-
partment. Nonetheless, as MacLeod [17] observes such institutional
challenges are only part of what makes working at the intersection
of disciplines difficult, and more understanding is needed about the
“likely cognitive difficulties that pervade, constrain and even block
collaborative interdisciplinary work” (p. 698). As Pederson [23]
similarly observes, while something of a consensus has emerged
in the literature around the necessity for integrating knowledge
from different disciplines, the differing “ontological and epistemo-
logical regimes” of disciplines means that integration can become
the ‘Achilles’ heel” of a project. Such barriers to researching and
teaching at the intersection of disciplines are observed in the lit-
erature, with multiple concerns raised that when Social Science
Name Year
joined
Academic
background
Jo Bates
(Deputy Programme
Co-ordinator)
15/16 Social Science/
Humanities, Critical
Data Studies
Dave Cameron 18/19 Psychology,
Human-Computer
Interaction
Alessandro Checco 16/17 Mathematics,
Computer Science,
Machine learning
Paul Clough
(Former Programme
Co-ordinator)
14/15 Computer Science,
Information Retrieval
Val Gillet 17/18 Chemoinformatics
Data Mining
Frank Hopfgartner
(Programme Co-ordinator)
17/18 Computer Science,
Information Retrieval
Suvodeep Mazumdar 18/19 Computer Science,
Human Computer
Interaction/ Data
Visualisation
Laura Sbaffi 16/17 Information
Behaviour, Applied
Statistics
Peter Stordy 14/15 Education and
Computer Science
Antonio de la Vega de
León
18/19 Biology, Chemistry,
Computer Science,
Chemoinformatics
Table 3: Academic background of team members
and Humanities (SSH) are brought into ‘interdisciplinary’ teams
it is often as “an ‘add on’, or as an independent project within the
overall project architecture”, risking that SSH “becomes merely an
appendix to the techno-scientific disciplines” [23].
Building upon such insights, we became interested in opening
up a conversation amongst academics teaching on the Data Sci-
ence programme about how our Data Science team had evolved its
approach to working at the intersection of disciplines, what this
means for how topics related to FATE/CDS are integrated into the
curriculum, and what this might mean for our graduates’ under-
standing and appreciation of such challenges.
3 METHODOLOGY
We adopted a methodological approach that assumes a different
ontological and epistemological position than the dominant per-
spective in Data Science: collaborative auto-ethnography (CAE) [5]
combined with ‘provocation’ as method [22]. This approach was
selected not only because of its strengths in getting under the
surface of our own practice, but also its potential for fostering
the kinds of open communication and reflection needed within
multi-disciplinary teams. Building on the research methodology of
“auto-ethnography”, the CAE approach has been defined as “a quali-
tative research method in which researchers work in community to
collect their autobiographical materials and to analyse and interpret
their data collectively to gain a meaningful understanding of so-
ciocultural phenomena reflected in their autobiographical data” [5,
p. 23-24]. The approach has previously been used in similar con-
text to our own to explore working at the intersections of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and Arts [12, 25].
The aims of CAE are to develop the group’s understanding of self
in socio-cultural context, community building among participants,
and empowerment/transformation. Common challenges include
the logistics of contributing, power dynamics in the group, and par-
ticipants willingness to open up [5]. With these challenges in mind,
principles of participation were discussed and agreed between all
participants prior to the first data collection meeting, and ethical
approval for the research project was gained from University of
Sheffield Information School.
All except one academic staff member on the Data Science team
were actively engaged on the project. The one staff member that
was not engaged was supportive, but did not have the time available
due to undertaking a senior administrative role within the School.
Data collection was undertaken in three stages.
(1) Three articles on teaching, researching and communicat-
ing at the intersection of disciplines were selected, and key
quotations were selected as ‘provocations’ [22] for the team.
(2) A ‘provocations’ document and list of questions for individ-
ual reflection were circulated to all team members. Team
members were given a week to reflect on the provocations
and write an individual response to the questions, prior to
sharing with the group.
(3) Two 2-hour group discussion meetings. The first focused on
the evolution of the degree and how it sits at the intersection
of disciplines, the implications of this for our integration of
FATE/CDS, and the opportunities, risks and challenges of
deepening disciplinary integration. The second meeting fo-
cused on our ideal approach to FATE/CDS integration, pros
and cons of such an approach, different stakeholders’ per-
spectives and practicalities. These meetings were recorded
and transcribed.
Due to time constraints, the development of the ‘provocations’
and questions for individual reflection and group discussion was led
by one person who had familiarity FATE/CDS, Social Science/Hu-
manities methods and some of the literature and debates around
interdisciplinarity, with input from other team members on an
opt-in basis.
We adopted an ‘analytical’, rather than ‘evocative’, approach [5]
to our CAE data analysis and write up, and a writing style and
structure more familiar to ACM conference participants than some
traditional CAE approaches. Given tight time constraints and lack
of availability of some participants during the data analysis and
write-up period, this stage was also led by a single group member
with experience in qualitative methods with input on drafts from
other participants.
Data collected through individual reflections and group discus-
sions were thematically analysed [24]. Identified themes were: (1)
Challenges of disciplinary integration; (2) Evolution of the pro-
gramme; (3) FATE and Critical Data Studies; (4) People – staff and
students; (5) Data Science Curricula; (6) Overcoming challenges.
Each theme had a range of underlying codes related to the overall
thematic concept. Codes and themes were developed through a
combination of data-driven and literature-driven methods.
4 FINDINGS
The following section presents some of our key findings from the
collaborative-autoethnography process.
4.1 Moving Towards Values-Driven
Development
At the time of the programme’s initiation in 2014/15, programme
leaders were driven by a need to develop a postgraduate level degree
that would successfully diversify the Information School’s taught
programmes offer and attract new students to the School,
“it sort of started out probably, just, we just had to
create something. . . we were quite successful as a
department, [we] attracted students who didn’t want
to do that Computer Science type of course. . . that’s
the sort of target that we were looking at... what we
called then the ‘type two’ data scientist”.
The programme developers were bound by tight constraints in
terms of staffing and the creation of new modules:
“weweren’t given free reign... we couldn’t create loads
of new modules, so there’s practical constraints as
well, I think we were allowed to create three or four
new modules”.
We acknowledged how these conditions shaped the initial design
of the programme, recognising that the drivers, constraints and
the techno-scientific backgrounds of those involved meant, under-
standably, that curriculum concerns initially emphasised practical
skill development, rather than more social concerns:
“Thinking about the social aspects wouldn’t have been
my first worry, my first worry would have been the
actual practical output, so what skills can we provide
students with”.
Perhaps unsurprisingly given the heavy marketisation of UK
Higher Education in recent years [31], beyond the need to define
and teach core Data Science skills, the main drivers of the pro-
gramme’s early development were largely financial and market-led.
Primarily, the programme design aimed to attract students (and
their fees) in a subject area that was reported by industry to have a
skills shortage, and was constrained by the amount of institutional
investment provided for staffing and module development.
We reflected how since 2014/15 the programme had undergone a
“fairly fast... transformation” with Critical Data Studies perspectives
being embedded in the core of the programme as new people joined
the team. As a previous programme leader pointed out:
“I don’t think at the outset we probably thought about
it as we’re thinking about it now... and particularly
having Jo’s input, that’s how things have I think evolved,
kind of over time.”
This shifting perspective represents not only changes in the peo-
ple involved and the content taught, but also the opening of a space
for fostering values-driven curriculum design. Despite differing
levels of experience and confidence, all programme team members
were keen to engage with a values-driven approach to teaching
Data Science that emphasised concerns around FATE and CDS.
We also observed that our engagement with a values-driven
approach extended beyond the integration of FATE/CDS into the
broader culture of the team, including our reflections on pedagogi-
cal issues, internationalisation and a shared commitment to work
together across disciplinary boundaries despite the various com-
municative and philosophical barriers we surfaced.
While the Data and Society module has been core to the pro-
gramme since 2016/17, a previous programme leader reflected on
how topics relating to FATE and CDS had been integrated into the
programme design:
“I think one of the comments [in the provocations
document] that resonated with me... was... maybe
the social sciences being a bit of a bolt on, and it
was never really intended to be that, but I do wonder
whether that’s possibly how it did start out. And as
we kind of evolved over time I think, you know, a
classic example of this is that, Jo, you gave I think one
lecture on the introduction to data science, which was
data and society, and over time that evolved then to
be a whole module, to then evolve to you now being a
deputy programme coordinator where you can shape
the programme”.
Team members had different perspectives on the extent to which
FATE/CDS topics were currently integrated into the curriculum.
While some perceived a deepening integration, one new team mem-
ber observed:
“I mean I got the impression from the outside that a
lot of our modules are technical, and then we basically
expect Jo to deal with the social part in the Data and
Society module [all laugh]”.
Despite this observation, there was evidence that elements of
FATE were slowly emerging in one or two practical modules. One
module leader reported being
“more mindful every year... I started, just last year...
to introduce little elements of, you know, be mindful
of how you use the data, and give little example of
misuse and what is not appropriate”
“In my teaching, I introduce various examples that
illustrate the need for transparency”.
Others, however, were less confident:
“In relation to my Database Design module, I struggle
to understand how these concepts [FATE] are related.
Hence, there’s a huge ‘gap’ [in knowledge]”.
Despite significant changes in recent years, some weaknesses
were perceived in our current approach to integrating FATE/CDS
into the programme design and assessment:
“Perhapswe aremissing an element—which is putting
those [Data and Society] concepts, ideas, debates, ar-
guments into practice... in relation to different techni-
cal skills that are being learnt”
“To what degree are those aspects, the sort of social
science aspects covered in the coursework? Because
the students, they’re very coursework driven. Is it only
Jo’s coursework that really explores that? The rest of
us are getting them to crunch numbers, produce vi-
sualisations and so on. Do we get them, for example,
to create a visualisation thinking about the social as-
pects, the effect that they might have? Probably not,
and that’s fine, so therefore maybe it’s our failing, not
the students that we haven’t got their attention by
getting it embedded in the coursework”.
Our reflections around these challenges were inspired by the idea
of a “third space” discussed by Klaassen in the ‘provocations’. Ad-
vocates argue that learning is “trigger[ed]” in the ‘third-spaces’ at
the boundaries of disciplines, cultures and social groups [14]. This
concept resonated strongly, and in different ways, for team mem-
bers. As our discussions evolved, our emergent understanding was
that while our current programme design did, under certain condi-
tions, have the capacity to generate a ‘third space’ there was more
we could do to design a curriculum and modes of assessment that
actively fostered the development of a ‘third space’, thus enhanc-
ing students (and academics) capacity to be “fluent” in FATE/CDS
driven Data Science.
Various practical suggestions for a programme level approach
to FATE/CDS that would activate such a third-space were explored.
For example, rather than conceptualising the curriculum as a se-
ries of complementary modules, the team saw potential for better
FATE/CDS integration and attainment of the programme learning
outcomes by merging core modules into one coherent and inte-
grated block taught and assessed by the Data Science teammembers.
The team will explore these ideas further in the coming months
alongside the various administrative and assessment related chal-
lenges that we identified such approaches would undoubtedly raise,
including how to ensure an adapted programme design still meets
the requirements of our existing – or a replacement – external
accreditation body.
4.2 What do we want...?
While at the surface level there was a clear commitment to the
deeper integration of FATE/CDS into the Data Science degree, as
our discussions evolved, we began to become more aware of the
complexities and challenges about what this may mean in practice.
Two key issues emerged: (1) What do we mean by FATE/CDS? Do
we have a shared and coherent understanding? (2) What is the
meaning of FATE/CDS in an international classroom and in the
context of decolonising the curriculum and maintaining academic
freedom?
These definitional issues were recognised as a challenge when
collaborating at the intersection of disciplines:
“What we mean by these concepts as well... all the
constructs are debated; people disagree about what
they mean. You could spend your entire academic
career just trying to define what justice is for example,
and I think that adds an extra layer of complexity
probably, not just in terms of the relationship between
us and the students... but also probably within the
team as well. We all have a different understanding
about what all of these different concepts mean... I’m
not even sure I know what some of these concepts
mean for myself”.
In our discussions about the struggles of working in a multi-
disciplinary context it was expressed by many team members that
they struggled with the philosophical nature of SSH approaches that
underpin many of these conceptual debates, and which contrasted
with the often unexplored philosophical norms of disciplines they
were more familiar with:
“Coming from Data/Computer Science into the Social
Sciences/Humanities field, I always found it strange
the importance (maybe fixation) with the research
setting, and all of the different fields and frameworks
present.”
“Working in Data/Computer Science the positivist re-
search philosophy seems invisible in its ordinariness”.
There was also a feeling that philosophical flexibility ought to
go both ways:
“So, I see a bit of asymmetry... So, the direction is only
— it seems only — one way... so the other way would
be: okay, I’m a social scientist, and I want maybe...
to do something that can be more reproductive, or
viable... so the integration from let’s say ‘technical’...
So, if we have an idea of justice or fairness, how can
we put it in a technical way?”
This philosophical framing and uncertainty about different theo-
retical approaches and concepts tended to dominate cross-disciplinary
perspectives, and some expressed a strong emotional reaction to
encountering SSH approaches for the first time:
“It was a shock in the beginning and it still partly is”
“The first encounter was traumatic”.
Similarly, from the Social Science perspective one team member
spoke of becoming “disillusioned with Stats” at undergraduate level.
Many of us reported having dismissive attitudes towards other
approaches at some point, but over time shifting perspective —
often as a result of working in collaboration with others.
Despite most of us emphasising philosophical differences as a
key challenge, some team members observed that on reflection
many of the issues at stake were political — rather than strictly
philosophical — in nature:
“I started to notice more the political ideologies em-
bedded in self-professed completely impartial hard
science work. . . I am more careful in trying to under-
stand the underlying ideological assumptions that are
often embedded in computational work, and I try to
expose the ideology driving my research questions
before diving in into them”
“It’s not just a philosophical issue, it’s a political ideol-
ogy issue, and I think we need to sort of stay mindful
of that, that it’s not just being awkward about philos-
ophy, but that there’s a reason for that, that’s political
in nature, that people would want to cling onto a
certain way of thinking about a concept”.
This emphasis on the political nature of FATE/CDS is currently
reflected in the Data and Society module, with its emphasis on
power and agency, as well as philosophical and ethical concerns.
However, there was limited time in this project for capturing a
deeper understanding of our diverse perspectives on the power
dynamics and politics surrounding how we define concepts such
as FATE/CDS, and some things were, for now, left unexplored. This
is evident in a brief aside in a discussion about the potential for
external accreditation of any new FATE/CDS oriented developments
we implemented:
“Speaker 1: Does Microsoft do anything, because I
know they got their new centre for FATE, Fairness
Accountability Transparency and Ethics, I don’t know
if they do anything, you know, or Google for exam-
ple, someone like that, I know they have whole teams
now, and centres set up where they do some kind of—,
Speaker 2: Well would it be better that we become the
authority that puts stars on to the people?”
The meaning we give to FATE/CDS as a programme team, and
the politics of who is given the authority to define meaning and
shape practice are crucial. For our team this remains a key issue to
explore as we deepen the integration of FATE/CDS into the Data
Science curriculum.
A similar concern arose in relation to our role as educators
within international classrooms. As seen in Table 1, the majority of
students (88% in 2018/19) registered on our Data Science programme
are international (i.e., not UK or EU). While there is some diversity
in nationality among international students, the vast majority are
Chinese. How to address issues around FATE/CDS in this context,
including in relation to broader efforts to decolonise the curriculum,
arose on a number of occasions in our discussions:
“it is very Western, so these concepts of ethics, fair-
ness, accountability, transparency, a lot of them are
very liberal concepts, particularly fairness, account-
ability and transparency, I’d say”
“I mean... data justice, so we would already be bi-
ased in there because we would look at it from a UK,
European perspective... Now someone from another
country, a different culture might have a different per-
spective. Now you might say, “Well okay, but it’s a
British degree,” but then a counter argument to that
would be, “Well, this is colonialism, you’re putting on
your world view, teaching your world view”
“Yeah, but can you possibly be objective, I mean this
is our culture, so we teach what we know best, and
they decided to come here to learn what we can teach,
so we cannot accommodate for everyone”
“I mean I think we should stick, but we should have
a broader understanding of where they are coming
from, in order to understand how far they need to
come”
“I think this could be what the ‘third space’ is talking
about, it’s just saying, just discussing about, you know,
‘in my culture this is not a concept’, ‘but this is not
even applicable from where I come from’, so having
that space and kind of protected space where there
is more of a collaborative feeling, where you know,
everyone can share what they feel like, is going to be
quite interesting”.
Through consideration of being mindful of the different cultural
assumptions we and our students might be bringing to the class-
room, we also recognised that by deepening FATE/CDS integration
we would likely introduce more potentially contentious topics into
the classroom. Our discussions highlighted the need to be more
confident of our own boundaries about what was acceptable:
“Speaker 1: Would there ever come a point where you
would actually put your foot down and say, “No, that’s
unacceptable,” what someone was saying, because it
just jarred so much with your beliefs? Just say if some-
one says something particularly sexist or racist and
they genuinely meant it, how does that work out?”
Speaker 2: “I think there comes a point where peo-
ple are stepping over a line, you know, where what
they’re actually doing is sort of like inciting hate or
something, which is illegal... Yeah, I think there are
boundaries... I think they need to be very sensitively
handled within the classroom context. But yeah, I
think generally the idea is to open up to discussion,
not to enforce an agenda. I can have my views but I’m
never going to say to a student, “You need to think
like me” - that’d be authoritarian. But yeah, so I think
we do need to reflect on that and make it clear–, be-
cause it would destroy the teaching environment as
well if students perceived that they had to think in
a particular way, or they had to think in a particular
way in order to pass the assessment”.
While some members of the team had some experience of ad-
dressing somewhat contentious topics in their teaching, including
with students who may face repercussions in their home country
for voicing particular opinions, others expressed worry about their
confidence in being able to handle such issues.
“You’re dealing continually with tricky situations, and
I’ve suddenly got cold feet, thinking, oh dear, have
I got the skills to facilitate a discussion that allows
me to know what the boundaries are and things. I
probably will be [ok]. It’s all about confidence, isn’t
it, and I’ve been teaching for a very long time and I
still find it a bit scary”.
This is clearly an important concern if the team were to deepen
the integration of FATE/CDS across the curriculum. Team members
initially considered whether one way to mitigate such issues might
be to limit the “topics we allow [students] to work on” or avoid
particular topics in classroom materials. However, on reflection
we acknowledged this would be a form of “self-censorship” and
raised concerns in relation to academic freedom. While we were
not able to fully resolve the concern, there was a sense that we
would likely need to have an approach that would enable free and
open discussion on contentious issues “so long as it’s not illegal
and it’s not outside the university allowed policy” (i.e., in relation
to Dignity at Work, Equality & Diversity and Harassment).
4.3 What do the students want?
Through our discussions we slowly moved towards a vision of how
we might integrate more FATE/CDS topics into our Data Science
curriculum; however, uncertainties were raised about what students
want from a Data Science degree. Given the time constraints and
sensitivity of discussions, we were not able to engage students in
this study; however, we plan to do so in follow up work.
While the societal aspect of the current degree design does attract
some (particularly UK) students to the programme, and the Data
and Society module receives positive feedback from many students,
many also have a tendency to perceive technical modules to be
more relevant to their programme:
“I mean this is one of the issues on the Data and Soci-
ety module, is that it gets good marks for everything,
apart from the one that it comes out [a bit] weaker
on tends to be seeing the relevance of the module to
the programme”
Further discussions with students and student evaluations re-
vealed a potential difference in perception between home and in-
ternational students’ understanding of the programme.
“I think we have the problem that, I think our market-
ing is important for the home students, in that they
do understand the difference in the Masters [that we
cover societal aspects], but I don’t think it’s all that
obvious for international students”
“I think a lot of times it’s potentially because they are
coming here with the expectation of gaining techni-
cal skills... when they see the name Data Science, it
immediately captures their technical kind of interest”
“I think there’s also quite a number of students who
possibly don’t choose us on the grounds of content. So,
I think the idea would be that they choose the course
because they want that Social Science perspective on
Data Science, but I do think actually it’s probably not
quite that. It might be that now we’re listed in the
top, whatever, 100 universities, we’re a well-known
School, Data Science is kind of what we want to do,
that’s what they want to do... which could be where
this mismatching kind of ‘oh it isn’t quite what I ex-
pected’, because they kind of didn’t really look at [the
marketing]”.
This challenge is clearly a significant issue. In the context of the
UK’s heavily marketized Higher Education sector, the survival of
the programme is dependent upon the continued recruitment of
students, and as educators we would chose to teach students that
are engaged with our approach to Data Science and have chosen to
study with us on that basis.
This means that further FATE/CDS integration will require a
careful balancing act of developing new marketing materials aimed
at attracting students, potentially in new ‘markets’, who favour
our approach, while maintaining recruitment to the programme
at close to current levels. Nonetheless, despite the challenge there
was some optimism that such an approach could work:
“I could imagine that being quite successful, because
it’s in the news all the time, these issues, and people
are picking up on it, and we’re saying, “Well, that’s
what this degree’s about.” It would really knit things
together well.”
4.4 Fostering our capacity
A further challenge raised was our own capacity to deepen the inte-
gration of FATE/CDS across the Data Science curriculum. Capacity
issues were raised in relation to our existing workloads which were
stretched due to a rise in student numbers, and our current areas
of expertise and confidence in delivering effective teaching and
assessment in this area. All team members highlighted knowledge
gaps on topics relevant to FATE/CDS, including in areas such as:
“theoretical frameworks in which to consider the
topic, such as notions of fairness and bias”;
“I feel ill-equipped around legal issues within the
area”;
“often I have problems in following some arguments
because I don’t have the philosophical background
that is often taken for granted in some papers”;
“the theoretical, ontological context of research and
how to integrate that intomy teaching of fundamental
statistics!”;
“putting those [FATE/CDS] concepts, ideas, debates,
arguments into practice in relation to different tech-
nical skills that are being learnt – I don’t feel that I’ve
got the skills to be able to do that”;
“how these issues can be integrated into the day-to-
day life of a data scientist is also where I feel I have a
gap – how can you put these issues and theories into
practice and operation within businesses?”
As individuals we clearly felt we had significant gaps in the
knowledge required to deliver a state-of-the-art FATE/CDS orien-
tated Data Science curriculum. However, upon reflection it became
clearer that collectively we have a lot of knowledge and experience
to share within the team. It was agreed that, although support and
accreditation from external organisations with relevant expertise
might be valuable, we could also to a great extent “help ourselves”.
A variety of practical suggestions to empower team members to
share knowledge were proposed, including 101 sessions, reading
materials, auditing modules across the programme, discussion ses-
sions on contentious topics, simulating the classroom environment,
and targeted seminars on communicating across disciplines – some
of which we will be exploring this academic year. Core to any de-
velopments in this domain will be to ensure that these knowledge
sharing spaces we produce will foster learning:
“it needs to be a space where you feel secure, it’s an
informal space where you don’t feel embarrassed to
say I don’t know, please can you help me learn that,
so it’s quite interesting how you create that space and
make it a space where people are willing to kind of,
you know, learn and share and so on”.
Looking further in to the future, recruitment of new staff mem-
bers was also recognised as important. While the programme team
was perceived to be somewhat diverse in gender and nationality, it
was acknowledged that
“if we want to go all the way through with it being
unbiased and so on, [we need] to actually find the
right candidates from all populations, which could be
a challenge as well”.
5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Through engaging in this research project, we confirmed our com-
mitment to FATE/CDS integration in principle and recognised the
insights we had gained teaching FATE/CDS as a core part of the
curriculum since 2016/17. However, deeper reflection raised ques-
tions about the meaning and application of FATE/CDS concepts,
and the practicalities and politics of how to integrate them.
We noted that our current approach towards integrating FATE/CDS
into the curriculum was situated somewhere between a multi- and
interdisciplinary approach [14], with FATE/CDS teaching and as-
sessment largely, albeit not entirely, siloed in the Data and Society
module. We observed that relevant topics were beginning to filter
into some more practical modules and some dissertation projects,
and that strong students were able to build their own links – cre-
ating a ‘third space’ [1, 14] – between modules. Nonetheless, we
agreed that a fully interdisciplinary approach would require a much
deeper integration of FATE/CDS into the curriculum, potentially
through combining all core learning and assessment into a single
unified module. Extending this logic further, we recognised that
a transdisciplinary approach [14] would further require increased
engagement with non-academic knowledge, and that this may need
to extend beyond our current industry links if the programme is to
deepen its FATE/CDS ethos.
Overall, our programme appears to have a relatively advanced
and well-resourced approach to FATE/CDS integration compared
with other programmes reported in the literature e.g., [10, 15, 21,
26, 27]. Further, we work well together as a multi-disciplinary team
– communication is open and respectful, there is an appreciation
for one another’s knowledge and insights – and we envisage this
should make for a solid foundation for discussion around more
contentious topics around the ‘politics of FATE/CDS’ that will need
to be addressed if we decide to further integrate the degree. While
there were instances of cross-disciplinary unfamiliarity, there was
little evidence of the team being greatly hampered by the related
“cognitive difficulties that pervade, constrain and even block col-
laborative interdisciplinary work” described by MacLeod [17, p.
698]. Nonetheless, we identified clear limits to our current level of
integration, and challenges and potential barriers to further inte-
gration.
Despite various calls in the literature for FATE/CDS integration
into Data Science Curricula, there has so far been little examination
of these practical and political challenges of enabling this to happen.
Through our reflections and group discussions, we observed that
the challenge of FATE/CDS integration is not only a question of
what and how we should teach and how we as educators gain that
knowledge, but how this can be achieved in practice within the
complex socio-material conditions our work takes place within. For
example, the challenges of working in a highly marketized higher
education sector mean that not only do changes that may impact
student recruitment hold significant risks, but that as academics we
are also working in highly pressurised environments with little time
for personal study to address gaps in understanding and re-thinking
existing teaching materials and assessments. Further, values-driven
curriculum development raises a series of complex challenges in
a programme that attracts students who may have very different
cultural values and assumptions to the academics teaching the
course. How this is handled sensitively and mindfully with regard
to decolonisation efforts is still to be fully explored.
This suggests that alongside the numerous calls formore FATE/CDS
to be embedded into the curriculum, the community also needs to
work together to address the practical challenges of implementing
this in practice. Failure to address these practicalities may lead to a
situation where Data Science programmes become FATE-washed.
That is, they have a veneer of FATE, but fail to equip students with
the desire and ability to embed their critical insights into their fu-
ture data practice. With this in mind, we conclude by making a
number of suggestions:
• Creating learning spaces. Our discussions illuminated the
need for Data Science teams to work collaboratively across
sub-disciplines to share knowledge and insights that would
help teammembers to deepen the high-quality integration of
FATE/CDS across teaching and assessment. It is important to
recognise that everyone does not need to be an expert in all
areas of the curriculum, however team members can support
one another to deepen collective understanding and synthe-
sise insights. The importance of such space being informal
and supportive, creating an environment in which colleagues
can acknowledge they don’t understand something is crucial.
As is ensuring learning is accessible in relation to already
heavy workloads, and recognising the need for learning in
all directions – ‘social’↔ ‘technical’. Such space could also
be extended beyond individual academic institutions, to fos-
ter the development of online and offline cross-disciplinary
learning spaces in the wider community
• The politics of FATE. Our discussions began to surface dif-
ferences beyond the philosophical assumptions of disciplines
that are emphasised in the literature on interdisciplinarity
that were more political in nature. Such differences began to
emerge in discussions aroundwho gets to define best practice
in FATE, and are likely to surface again as discussions around
integration unfold. This mirrors wider discussions beginning
to take place in the FATE/CDS community, for example in
relation to the decision to embed a program on Critiquing
and Re-thinking Accountability, Fairness and Transparency
(CRAFT) in the 2020 FAT* Conference1 and Taylor and Pur-
tova’s [29] recent paper. Acknowledging and understanding
this political dimension to FATE/CDS integration will be
important for Data Science degree teams such as ours that
aim to deepen integration of FATE/CDS into the curriculum.
As a community we can help teams better understand these
issues through the sharing of short, accessible and engaging
materials that illuminate the power dynamics at play in such
efforts, and which can be used in reading and discussion
groups.
• Collaborate across borders. In advancing an agenda around
FATE/CDS integration in Data Science we need to deepen
1https://fatconference.org/2020/callforcraft.html
our understanding of the cultural shaping of FATE discourse,
and work with international students and collaborators, and
experts in curriculum decolonisation efforts, to address these
issues. In our team’s case, this particularly means enhanc-
ing our understanding of Chinese perspectives on issues of
ethics and social justice. Existing networks and organisa-
tions such as the iSchools’ Consortium and ACM FAT* may
be well placed to help foster such collaboration.
• The image of Data Science. Many prospective students
– and many curriculum designers – perceive Data Science
solely as a technical discipline with good earning potential.
Deeper integration of FATE/CDS into Data Science curricula
could be hindered due to student resistance and reluctance
to engage with the non-technical parts of programmes. We
need to think about how Data Scientists might move away
from this image towards a more socio-technical identity that
positions ethical and political considerations at the core of
Data Science.
• Data Science competency frameworks.There are increas-
ing mentions of FATE relevant topics in published compe-
tency frameworks, however there is still a need to consider
FATE/CDS related competencies at a deeper level. Without
creating too many restrictions on teaching practice and in-
novation – what should a well-designed FATE/CDS-driven
Data Science curricula address? What should curriculum
designers be thinking about, and what should students un-
derstand and be able to do at the end of their studies? How
might educators go about teaching key and emerging topics?
Existing networks and academic fields such as ACM FAT*,
ACM Data Science Task force, iSchools Consortia, as well as
some non-academic partners, could be well positioned to col-
laborate on articulating such competencies, and encouraging
the development of open learning resources.
While the challenges identified in our research relating to deep-
ening FATE/CDS integration in Data Science curricula are signif-
icant, and our possible responses to them are constrained by the
socio-material contexts we find ourselves embedded within, they
are not wholly insurmountable. Our struggles to overcome these
challenges should also help us remain mindful of the challenges
that FATE/CDS-aware Data Science graduates are likely to face as
they enter their own workplaces. Enhancing Data Science students’
critical and ethical thinking is clearly not a cure-all; unethical and
socially irresponsible data practice will continue as long as it goes
rewarded and poorly regulated. However, with these caveats in
mind, we conclude by arguing that in order to foster the devel-
opment and spread of more socially aware and responsible data
practice, it remains important to work together to overcome these
challenges and empower the development of interdisciplinary teams
that can integrate and deliver high quality FATE/CDS teaching in
Data Science curricula.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is partially funded by the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement
No. 810105 (CyCAT).
REFERENCES
[1] Sanne F. Akkerman and Arthur Bakker. 2011. Boundary Crossing and Boundary
Objects. Review of Educational Research 81, 2 (2011), 132–169. https://doi.org/10.
3102/0034654311404435
[2] Paul Anderson, James Bowring, Renée McCauley, George Pothering, and Christo-
pher Starr. 2014. An Undergraduate Degree in Data Science: Curriculum and a
Decade of Implementation Experience. In Proceedings of the 45th ACM Technical
Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE ’14). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 145–150. https://doi.org/10.1145/2538862.2538936
[3] J. Bates, P. Andrews, and E. Nunn. 2017. Learning with Data Scientists: reflections
on teaching critical data studies to postgraduate Data Science students. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd Data Power Conference 2017. https://carleton.ca/datapower/wp-
content/uploads/DataPower2017_Program_FINAL-2-1.pdf
[4] Ben Baumer. 2015. A Data Science Course for Undergraduates: Thinking With
Data. The American Statistician 69, 4 (2015), 334–342. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00031305.2015.1081105
[5] H. Chang, F. W. Ngunjiri, and K. C. Henandez. 2013. Collaborative Autoethnogra-
phy. Taylor and Francis, Oxon.
[6] Y. Demchenko, T. Wiktorski, and A. Belloum. 2017. EDISON Data Science Frame-
work: Part 3. Data Science Model Curriculum (MC-DS) Release 2. Retrieved
August 1st, 2019 from https://zenodo.org/communities/edison-edsf/?page=1&
size=20
[7] Lina Dencik, Arne Hintz, and Jonathan Cable. 2016. Towards data justice? The
ambiguity of anti-surveillance resistance in political activism. Big Data & Society
3, 2 (2016), 2053951716679678. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951716679678
[8] C. D’Ignazio and L. Klein. 2019. Data feminism (community review site). MIT
Press. Retrieved August 1st, 2019 from https://bookbook.pubpub.org/data-
feminism
[9] Richard D. De Veaux et al. 2017. Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate
Programs in Data Science. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application 4, 1
(2017), 15–30. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-statistics-060116-053930
[10] ACMData Science Task Force. 2019. Computing Competencies for Undergraduate
Data Science Curricula. Retrieved August 1st 2019 from http://www.cs.williams.
edu/~andrea/DSReportInitialFull.pdf
[11] Business Higher Education Forum. 2016. Competency Map for the
Data Science and Analytics-Enabled Graduate. Retrieved August 1st,
2019 from https://s3.goeshow.com/dream/DataSummit/Data%20Summit%202018/
BHEF_2016_DSA_competency_map_1.pdf
[12] Kelly W. Guyotte and Nicola W. Sochacka. 2016. Is This Research? Productive
Tensions in Living the (Collaborative) Autoethnographic Process. International
Journal of Qualitative Methods 15, 1 (2016), 1609406916631758. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1609406916631758
[13] Helen Kennedy and Jo Bates. 2017. Data Power in Material Contexts: Introduc-
tion. Television & New Media 18, 8 (2017), 701–705. https://doi.org/10.1177/
Journal of Engineering Education 43, 6 (2018), 842–859. https://doi.org/10.1080/
03043797.2018.1442417
[15] K. Leetaru. 2019. Computer Science Could Learn A Lot From Li-
brary And Information Science. Retrieved August 1st, 2019 from
https://www.forbes.com/sites/kalevleetaru/2019/08/05/computer-science-
could-learn-a-lot-from-library-and-information-science/#8f2ed02587d7
[16] Sabina Leonelli. 2016. Locating ethics in data science: responsibility and account-
ability in global and distributed knowledge production systems. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sci-
ences 374, 2083 (2016). https://doi.org/doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0122
[17] Miles MacLeod. 2018. What makes interdisciplinarity difficult? Some conse-
quences of domain specificity in interdisciplinary practice. Synthese 195, 2 (01
Feb 2018), 697–720. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1236-4
[18] Engineering National Academies of Sciences and Medicine. 2018. Data Science
for Undergraduates: Opportunities and Options: 2018. The National Academies
Press, Washington, DC. https://doi.org/10.17226/25104
[19] G. Neff, B. Fiore-Gartland, and L. Osburn. 2017. Critique and Contribute: A
Practice-Based Framework for Improving Critical Data Studies and Data Science.
Big Data 5, 2 (2017), 85–97. https://doi.org/10.1089/big.2016.0050
[20] S. U. Noble. 2018. Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism.
New York University Press, New York.
[21] Virginia Ortiz-Repiso, Jane Greenberg, and Javier Calzada-Prado. 2018. A cross-
institutional analysis of data-related curricula in information science programmes:
A focused look at the iSchools. Journal of Information Science 44, 6 (2018), 768–784.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0165551517748149
[22] Luci Pangrazio. 2017. Exploring provocation as a research method in the social
sciences. International Journal of Social Research Methodology 20, 2 (2017), 225–
236. https://doi.org/10.1080/13645579.2016.1161346
[23] David Pedersen. 2016. Integrating social sciences and humanities in inter-
disciplinary research. Palgrave Communications 2 (07 2016), 16036. https:
//doi.org/10.1057/palcomms.2016.36
[24] Gery W. Ryan and H. Russell Bernard. 2003. Techniques to Identify Themes. Field
Methods 15, 1 (2003), 85–109. https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X02239569
[25] Nicola W. Sochacka, Kelly. W. Guyotte, and Joachim Walther. 2016. Learning
Together: A Collaborative Autoethnographic Exploration of STEAM (STEM
+ the Arts) Education. Journal of Engineering Education 105, 1 (2016), 15–42.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jee.20112
[26] Il-Yeol Song and Yongjun Zhu. 2016. Big data and data science: what should we
teach? Expert Systems 33, 4 (2016), 364–373. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.12130
[27] Il-Yeol Song and Yongjun Zhu. 2017. Big Data and Data Science: Opportunities
and Challenges of iSchools. Journal of Data and Information Science 2, 3 (2017),
1–18. https://doi.org/doi:10.1515/jdis-2017-0011
[28] Linnet Taylor. 2017. What is data justice? The case for connecting digital rights
and freedoms globally. Big Data & Society 4, 2 (2017), 2053951717736335. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/2053951717736335
[29] Linnet Taylor and Nadezhda Purtova. 2019. What is responsible and sustainable
data science? Big Data & Society 6, 2 (2019), 2053951719858114. https://doi.org/
10.1177/2053951719858114
[30] Brendan Tierney. 2013. Type I and Type II Data Scientists. Retrieved August 1st,
2019 from https://oralytics.com/2013/03/22/type-i-and-type-ii-data-scientists/
[31] Michael Tomlinson. 2017. Student perceptions of themselves as ‘consumers’ of
higher education. British Journal of Sociology of Education 38, 4 (2017), 450–467.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01425692.2015.1113856
[32] Coleen R. Wilder and Ceyhun O. Ozgur. 2015. Business Analytics Curriculum
for Undergraduate Majors. INFORMS Trans. Edu. 15, 2 (Jan. 2015), 180–187.
https://doi.org/10.1287/ited.2014.0134
