Towards a Critical Race Methodology in Algorithmic Fairness
Alex Hanna∗
Emily Denton∗
Andrew Smart
Jamila Smith-Loud
{alexhanna,dentone,andrewsmart,jsmithloud}@google.com
ABSTRACT
We examine the way race and racial categories are adopted in
algorithmic fairness frameworks. Current methodologies fail to ad-
equately account for the socially constructed nature of race, instead
adopting a conceptualization of race as a fixed attribute. Treating
race as an attribute, rather than a structural, institutional, and rela-
tional phenomenon, can serve to minimize the structural aspects
of algorithmic unfairness. In this work, we focus on the history of
racial categories and turn to critical race theory and sociological
work on race and ethnicity to ground conceptualizations of race for
fairness research, drawing on lessons from public health, biomedi-
cal research, and social survey research. We argue that algorithmic
fairness researchers need to take into account the multidimension-
ality of race, take seriously the processes of conceptualizing and
operationalizing race, focus on social processes which produce
racial inequality, and consider perspectives of those most affected
by sociotechnical systems.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing→ Sociology; • Social and professional
topics → Race and ethnicity.
KEYWORDS
algorithmic fairness, critical race theory, race and ethnicity
ACM Reference Format:
Alex Hanna, Emily Denton, Andrew Smart, and Jamila Smith-Loud. 2020.
Towards a Critical Race Methodology in Algorithmic Fairness. In Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* ’20), January 27–30, 2020,
Barcelona, Spain. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3351095.3372826
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
FAT* ’20, January 27–30, 2020, Barcelona, Spain
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6936-7/20/02.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372826
The problem does not end with the collection of racial
data; it only begins. The problem accelerates when
we attempt to analyze these data statistically... The
racialization of data is an artifact of both the strug-
gles to preserve and to destroy racial stratification.
Before the data can be deracialized, we must deracial-
ize the social circumstances that have created racial
stratification.
– Tufuku Zuberi [125, pp. 102]
1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been increasing recognition of the poten-
tial for algorithmic systems to reproduce or amplify existing social
inequities. In response, the research field of algorithmic fairness has
emerged. This rapidly evolving research area is focused on devel-
oping tools and techniques with aspirations to make development,
use, and resulting impact of algorithmic systems conform to various
social and legal notions of fairness. The concept of fairness, in ad-
dition to being situational, evolving, and contested from a number
of philosophical and legal traditions, can only be understood in
reference to the different social groups that constitute the organi-
zation of society. Consequently, the vast majority of algorithmic
fairness frameworks are specified with reference to these social
groups, often requiring a formal encoding of the groups into the
dataset and/or algorithm.
However, most social groups relevant to fairness analysis re-
flect highly contextual and unstable social constructs. These social
groups are often defined with recourse to legal anti-discrimination
concepts such as "protected classes," which, in the US, refers to race,
color, national origin, religion, sex, age, or disability. However, the
process of drawing boundaries around distinct social groups for
fairness research is fraught; the construction of categories has a
long history of political struggle and legal argumentation.
Numerous recent works have highlighted the limitations of cur-
rent algorithmic fairness frameworks [53, 108]. Several of these
critiques point to the tendency to abstract away critical social and
historical contexts and minimize the structural conditions that un-
derpin problems of algorithmic unfairness. We build on this critical
research, focusing specifically on the use of race and racial cate-
gories within this field. IN this literature, the topic of the instability
of racial categories has gone relative unexplored, with the notable
exception of Benthall and Haynes [12], which we discuss in detail
below.
Race is a major axis around which algorithmic allocation of
resources and representation is bound. It may indeed be the most
significant axis, given attention by investigative journalists (e.g. [7])
and critical race and technology scholars (e.g. [11, 20, 21, 24, 85]).
Because of this, it is imperative that the race-based methodologies
and racial categories themselves are interrogated and critically
evaluated.
In this paper we develop several lines of critique directed at the
treatment of race within algorithmic fairness methodologies. In
short, we observe that current methodologies fail to adequately
account for the socially constructed nature of race, instead adopting
a conceptualization of race as a fixed attribute. This manifests in the
widespread use of racial categories as if they represent natural and
objective differences between groups. Treating race as an attribute,
rather than a structural, institutional, and relational phenomenon,
in turn serves to minimize the structural aspects of algorithmic
unfairness.
The process of operationalizing race is fundamentally a project
of racial classification and thus must be understood as a political
project, or, more specifically, what Omi and Winant [86] refer to
as a racial project. The tools for measuring individual characteris-
tics, such as national censuses and other population-level survey
instruments, were and are still often based in the politics of racial
oppression and domination. While we acknowledge the importance
of measuring race for the purposes of understanding patterns of
differential performance or differentially adverse impact of algo-
rithmic systems, in this work, we emphasize that data collection
and annotation efforts must be grounded in the social and historical
contexts of racial classification and racial category formation. To
oversimplify is to do violence, or even more, to re-inscribe violence
on communities that already experience structural violence.
It is useful to distinguish between two ways in which race comes
into play in algorithmic fairness research: (i) the operationalization
of race, i.e. the process of converting the abstract concept of race
into something that is concrete and measurable and (ii) the use of
racial variables within algorithmic frameworks. These aspects are
tightly interconnected since race must be operationalized before
racial variables can be utilized.
Our contributions are as follows: we review the use of race in
prior fairness work and discuss an intervention in the debate on
racial categories. We then survey the history of racial classifica-
tion, scientific racism, and racial classification in national censuses.
We introduce the notion of multidimensionality of race, and sub-
sequently review how different disciplines have dealt with the
tricky problem of operationalizing race, most notably in biomedical,
survey, and public health research. In light of these discussions,
we address how race has been treated in the group fairness and
disaggregated analysis paradigms. Lastly, we argue that fairness re-
searchers need to take into account the multidimensionality of race,
take seriously the processes of conceptualizing and operationaliz-
ing race, focus on processes of racism, and consider perspectives of
those most affected by sociotechnical systems.
2 THE PROBLEMWITH RACIAL
CATEGORIES
In perhaps the best-known debate surrounding algorithmic fair-
ness, Julia Angwin and her colleagues illustrated the differing rates
at which Black defendants had been issued high pre-trial risk as-
sessment scores by the COMPAS recidivism prediction algorithm
compared to white defendants [7]. Equivant – then, Northpointe,
the company which developed COMPAS – defended the system
by reanalyzing the ProPublica data [28] and ProPublica later re-
sponded [6]. The debate has become a cornerstone of algorithmic
fairness research; to date, the original story has some 700 citations
on Google Scholar.
The Propublica analysis of COMPAS, as well as the responses
fromNorthpointe and other secondary analyses performed by third-
party researchers, relied on data from the Broward County Sheriff’s
Office which was obtained through a public records request. Race
classifications in this data identified defendants as Black, White,
Hispanic, Asian, Native American or Other. These categories look
familiar – they are nearly identical to the way that the US Census
defines race. However, there are the notable absences of the cate-
gories "Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander", and there is a
redefinition of "Hispanic" as a race rather than an ethnicity.
In the methodological appendix to the original article [69], Jeff
Larson and other ProPublica authors do not delve into how the
race of the defendant is measured. Larson admits that he did not
know how Broward County classified individuals 1. It’s not clear
why Broward County used the modified Census racial schema,
but, as detailed below, it may have to do with a 1977 directive
from the federal US Office of Management and Budget. In general,
approaches to measuring race for police records are inconsistent
across municipalities. They can rely on self-identification, state
records, or observation by criminal justice workers. In her work on
racial disparities in incarceration in Wisconsin, sociologist Pamela
Oliver notes that the race of a single individual can change across
records even within a single jurisdiction 2. Therefore, even in the
most famous debate of the field, we don’t know why the data take
on a particular racial schema, nor do we have information about
how defendants are racially categorized.
2.1 Using race-like categories?
While an area of major concern for critical race and technology
scholarship, the use of racial categories in algorithmic fairness re-
search (i.e. the research community which has emerged around
venues like FAT* and AIES) has largely gone unquestioned. There
are two important exceptions. First, in the original Gender Shades
paper which helped establish intersectional testing, Buolamwini
and Gebru note the instability of race and ethnicity labels, which
justifies their use of skin tone [22]. Second, the critique levied by
computational social scientist Sebastian Benthall and critical race
scholar Bruce D. Haynes [12] describes how little attention has
been given to the meaning of protected class labels, the political
orientation of class labels, and the normative assumptions of ma-
chine learning design. They focus on the typical referent group
– African-Americans in the US – and discuss how "racial classi-
fication is embedded in state institutions, and reinforced in civil
society in ways that are relevant to the design of machine learning
systems." Race is invoked because "racial classification signifies
social, economic, and political inequities anchored in state and civic
institutional practices."
We wholly agree with their overall argument, which is that
algorithmic fairness research has been largely silent on the issues
1Personal correspondence, Jeff Larson, August 19, 2019.
2Personal correspondence, Pamela Oliver, August 19, 2019.
of racial statistics and categories, and that in that silence, has thus
reified them. In their criticism of the COMPAS debate, we echo
their argument:
rather than taking racial statistics... at face value, the
process that generates them and the process through
which they are interpreted should be analyzed with
the same rigor and skepticism as the recidivism pre-
diction algorithm. Thematically, we argue that racial
bias is far more likely to come from human judgments
in data generation and interpretation than from an al-
gorithmic model, and that this has broad implications
for fairness in machine learning [12, pp. 291].
We diverge from their critique, not necessarily in their problem
formation, but in their solution. They offer up a narrow path to
follow which plots a course between the Scylla of "[m]achines
that ... [reify] racial categories that are inherent unfair" and the
Charybdis of "systems that allocate resources in ways that are
blind to race [which] will reproduce racial inequality in society"
[12, pp. 294]. In their solution, they propose using an unsupervised
machine learningmethod to create race-like categories which aim to
address "historical racial segregation with reproducing the political
construction of racial categories." One virtue of this method is that
it is attentive to creating a metric which makes sense with respect
to a particular social inequality, that is, spatial segregation. This is
something we agree with in our adoption of a multidimensional
perspective below.
We’d like to raise a few complexities in their formulation which
make us hesitant to adopt their solution. First, it would be a grave
error to supplant the existing categories of race with race-like
categories inferred by unsupervised learning methods. Despite the
risk of reifying the socially constructed idea called race, race does
exist in the world, as a way of mental sorting, as a discourse which is
adopted, as a social thing which has both structural and ideological
components. In other words, although race is social constructed,
race still has power. To supplant race with race-like categories for
the purposes of measurement sidesteps the problem.
Second, supplanting racewith race-like categories depends highly
on context, namely how race operates within particular systems
of inequality and domination. Benthall and Haynes restrict their
analysis to that of spatial segregation, which is to be sure, an im-
portant and active research area and subject of significant policy
discussion (e.g. [76, 99]). However, that metric may appear illegi-
ble to analyses pertaining to other racialized institutions, such as
the criminal justice system, education, or employment (although
one can readily see their connections and interdependencies). The
way that race matters or pertains to particular types of structural
inequality depends on that context and requires its own modes of
operationalization.
Third, and relatedly, as Wendy Chun and Ruha Benjamin have
discussed [11, 24], race operates bothwith and as technology. At the
same time we focus on the ontological aspects of race (what is race,
how is it constituted and imagined in the world), it is necessary to
pay attention to what we do with race and measures which may be
interpreted as race. The creation of metrics and indicators which
are race-like will still be interpreted as race. As we discuss more
below, the example of genomics research is indicative. Even as
genomics researchers warn not to interpret genetic ancestry as race
or ethnicity [15, 122], this has not prevented people (e.g. customers
of direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies) from interpreting
them as such [98].
Finally, we’d like to underline the infrastructural criticism embed-
ded in the act of categorization itself. By infrastructure, we refer to
the way that classifications and standards form the infrastructure of
our existing information society [17]. Inverting infrastructures and
seeking their fissures allows us to understand how they are used
in practice and how politics are embedded in their creation. This
point dovetails with the critiques levied by abolitionist activists,
scholars, and technologists [1, 9, 11]. J. Khadijah Abdurahman [1]
argues that to study algorithmic fairness is to sidestep the problem
beyond the algorithmic frame, that we, with communities who are
disproportionally affected by redlining, predictive policing, and
surveillance, should not just contest how "protected classes within
algorithms are generated-but [should] viscerally reject the notion
human beings should be placed in cages in the first place." The task
of using racial classifications at all requires us to expand the frame
to consider what the larger implications of classifying are. Who is
doing the classifying? For what purpose are they classifying and to
what end?
3 HISTORIES OF RACIAL CATEGORIZATION
We recount histories of racial category construction by administra-
tive and scientific bodies as a means of highlighting the decidedly
social constructivist notion of race. As Hacking [48] has said, social
constructivism is the act of "making up people." Social construction
does not mean that things in the world are not "real" [31], but that
that thing – be it a racial, gender, or class category – was brought
into existence or shaped by historical events, social forces, political
power, and/or colonial conquest, all of which could have been very
different. When we demonstrate that something is socially con-
structed, it becomes clear that it could be constructed differently,
and then we can start to demand changes in it [48, pp. 6-7].
Race as a concept is widely acknowledged by the social sciences
to be a social construction. In the racial formation framework, Omi
and Winant [86] discuss how race is both real and socially con-
structed. The social constructedness of race decenters the concept
as a property of individuals determined by phenotypical properties.
Instead, social constructivism places race within specific history
and context. The constructedness of race in any given point in time
is tied to the specific racial project. A racial project is "simultane-
ously an interpretation, representation, or explanation of racial
identities and meanings, and an effort to organize and distribute re-
sources (economic, political, cultural) along particular racial lines"
[86, pp. 56]. Those racial projects can range in scale and kind, in
the microinteractional to the structural.
Race is not something that arrived whole cloth, but needed to be
made up. Race, although socially constructed, of course has very
salient material effects. Accordingly, the most modern understand-
ing of race argues that it is inauthentic to conceptualize race as a
natural property of individuals. The "naturalization" of race and
racial categories do not come from nowhere. It has been constructed
and been continually reproduced as part of a project of upholding
a particular type of racial project – one that is historically and cul-
turally bound. Historian Ibram X. Kendi, for instance, thoroughly
outlines the history of race and racial projects from 15-century
Europe to the present [64]. Projects that "misrecognize" race as
natural [27] are driven by the hegemonic nature of racial projects
[86]. It would be more accurate to describe race as relational and as
a property of institutions, organizations, and larger structures [93].
Race may be more accurately discussed as having relational quali-
ties, with dimensions that are symbolic or based on phenotype, but
that are also contingent on specific social and historical contexts.
3.1 Classification and the Racial History of
Social Statistics
Classification is a process imbued with social, economic, and orga-
nizational imperatives [17, 38]. Those who do the categorizing have
their own institutional and occupational priorities. Categories them-
selves become a type of infrastructure: they are the ground upon
which other structural and ideational elements are built. When they
work, they are invisible, but when they break down, the boundaries
and assumptions begin to show. With the development of markets
and the rise of technological innovation and actuarial science, classi-
fication of individuals has moved from the more general assessment
based on subgroup distinction to individuation based on market
imperatives.
Although in the modern neoliberal era, markets have been an
emerging force in categorization and segmentation [39], the en-
tity tasked with categorization above all others has been the state.
Almost as soon as humans began living in agriculturally-based
communities, it became necessary to count the number of people
living under the control of a certain party [107]. Categorization was
also used to streamline counting items of like type – such as trees
in a forest, grain, or human beings. Further, since early grain-based
agriculture necessitated vast numbers of essentially slave-laborers,
rulers needed to know how many slaves there were and moreover,
who counted as a slave. As Scott argues, during the agricultural
revolution there was initially strong resistance to transitioning
from life as a hunter-gatherer to a more hierarchical, regimented,
and predictable existence as a slave harvesting grain and to "being
counted" by newly-created states [107].
The modern discipline of statistics grew out of a bureaucratic
need to manage large populations and natural resources [52]. More
specifically and perniciously, the field of social statistics emerged
from the need to make differentiations between white Europeans
and their descendants, and other peoples. Francis Galton was a
major figure in the development of social statistics; he was also a
eugenicist and a major proponent of using statistics as a means to
justify racial superiority of European-origin peoples [16, 124, 125].
As Galton writes in his Hereditary Genius:
The natural ability of which this book mainly treats,
is such as a modern European possesses in a much
greater average share than men of the lower races.
There is nothing either in the history of domestic
animals or in that evolution to make us doubt that
a race of sane men may be formed, who shall be as
much superior mentally and morally to the modern
European as the modern European is to the lowest of
the Negro races (quoted in [124]).
The practice of racial classification that emerged in social sta-
tistics is closely tied to the project of nation-building, in multiple
senses. In the first case, racial classification was a prerequisite to
the project of European colonization of the Americas. The racial-
ization of chattel slavery is a modern phenomenon. European colo-
nial projects developed alongside Enlightenment ideas of liberal
democracy. Creating structures of racial stratification necessitated
ideational components that would legitimate the enslavement of
Africans [125]. Until the early 20th century in the West and the
rise of cultural anthropologists such as Franz Boas, there was wide-
spread support for eugenics and scientific racism, and the belief
that the state must intervene to protect the physical and mental
characteristics of the white race. In 1926, 23 of 48 states had laws
permitting sterilization [106]. At the height of miscegenation leg-
islation (that is, laws against marriages which were "interracial"
or "cross-cultural" in nature), 41 American colonies and states had
laws against the practice [88]. As the project of nation-building
(more specifically, colonization of non-European nations) waned in
the 1960s, so did the popularity of eugenics as a scientific practice.
However, as Syed Mustafa Ali notes, the scientific racism under-
girding colonialism has persisted as "‘sedimented’ ways of knowing
and being – based on systems of categorisation, classification, and
taxonomisation and the ways that these are manifested in practices,
artefacts and technologies" [2]. Technologies of racial classification,
such as blood quantum for Native Americans, persist and upon lega-
cies of settler colonialism. These technologies become enshrined in
folk understandings of racial percentages, such as genetic ancestry
[113], or in law, as blood quantum remains a legal requisite to tribal
membership, tribal constitution, and land claims.
Second, since the founding of the Americas, delineating racial
boundaries has been part and parcel of the state-building project.
Assessing and evaluating racial and ethnic boundaries is a state
practice that coincides not only with a cultural understanding of
who belongs to the polity, but has and continually is a prerequisite
for formal citizenship in many countries. In the pre-war United
States, appeals to citizenship for non-native born residents were
fundamentally appeals to whiteness. Lopez documents how appeals
to whiteness and the boundaries of the category of whiteness flexed
and contracted in legal argumentation [73]. The 1790 Naturalization
Act restricted citizenship to "any alien, being a free white person"
who had been in the United States for at least two years. It wasn’t
until the passage of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952
that the explicit racialized nature of naturalization was restricted,
although the Act laid the groundwork for the current restrictive
race-based ratio system which exists today. Maghbouleh demon-
strates how, prior to 1952, Iranians could be used as a "racial hinge"
to argue both for and against claims to whiteness, and how citi-
zenship claims critically depended on who could make this claim
[75].
Third, national censuses are a critical component of state ma-
chinery. State enumeration of populations works to facilitate the
administrative and bureaucratic functions of the modern nation-
state. As Scott points out:
State simplifications such as maps, censuses, cadastral
lists, and standard units of measurement represent
techniques for grasping a large and complex reality;
in order for officials to be able to comprehend aspects
of the ensemble, that complex reality must be reduced
to schematic categories. The only way to accomplish
this is to reduce an infinite array of detail to a set of
categories that will facilitate summary descriptions,
comparisons, and aggregation. The invention, elabora-
tion, and deployment of these abstractions represent,
as Charles Tilly [116] has shown, an enormous leap
in state capacity – a move from tribute and indirect
rule to taxation and direct rule [106, pp. 77].
Furthermore, censuses not only quantify members of racial so-
cial groups, but also create and constitute the boundaries of these
social groups themselves. Melissa Nobles outlines how racial classifi-
cations are taken for granted by policymakers, but how national
censuses not only enumerate polity members into racial categories,
but also help to reinscribe racial categories themselves, that is,
"[c]ensus-taking is one of the institutional mechanisms by which
racial boundaries are set" [112, pp. xi]. In the US, the national census
is the sole basis for which representation is guaranteed in the House
of Representatives and the Electoral College. In the antebellum US,
the Three-Fifths Compromise, in which Black slaves were counted
as three-fifths of a human for the purposes of appropriation and
taxation, is the most dramatic example of racial classification in
counting populations. Whereas the passage of the 14th Amendment
guaranteed all Americans being counted as a whole person regard-
less of race, racial categories defined in the Census in the latter part
of the 19th Century reflected fractional referents to Black racial lin-
eage based in the ascendant movement of eugenics and race science
mentioned above. Categories of "octoroon" and "quadroon", along
with "mulatto" denoted fractional heredities of the Black population
[112].
Because of the allocative nature of census-taking and the bureau-
cracies associated with the practice, what goes into the census is
politically contested by mobilizing racial and ethnic groups. The
political contestation of the census has been laid bare recently with
the attempted introduction of a citizenship question into the US
Census and its potential for its dampening effects on participation
by Latinx groups [72]. For instance, after the 1950 Census, in light
of the discoveries of dramatic undercounts of non-white popula-
tions and with rising pressures from the Civil Rights Movement,
the 1960 Census shifting from interview identification to asking
individuals to self-identify their race. As Snipp rightly points out,
this procedural change was a "fundamental redefinition of race."
Population statistics formerly based on phenotypical appearances
were now based on "cultural affiliation and other deeply held per-
sonal considerations beyond the pale of conventional demographic
inquiry" [112, pp. 570]. This shift was not only bureaucratic but
also (perhaps unknowingly by the Census Bureau) ontological: race
as measured by the Census aligned more with the social construc-
tionism and less with essentialism. The Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) Directive No. 15 of 1977 instituted a standard in
racial classifications used by government agencies and developed a
standard for five distinct groups: (a) American Indians and Alaska
Natives, (b) Asian and Pacific Islanders, (c) Non-Hispanic Blacks, (d)
Non-Hispanic Whites, and (e) Hispanics. The impact of this direc-
tive had far-reaching implications, as this categorization "permeated
every level of government, many if not most large corporations,
and many other institutions such as schools and nonprofit orga-
nizations" ([87], cited in [112]). The 1997 revision of Directive No.
15 separated out Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, set
Hispanics and Latinos apart as an ethnic group (rather than a racial
group), and allowed respondents to provide multiple responses to
racial heritage [112].
Dramatic changes in governance have large downstream effects
for the accuracy of census counts and their categories. Khalfani et
al. document the differences between the South African numbers
before and after the reign of Mandela’s African National Congress,
and find that the raw counts and the estimations from aerial pho-
tography both dramatically undercount the majority African popu-
lations, as well as women [65]. The US Census Bureau spends a non-
trivial amount of effort getting enumeration correct for marginal-
ized groups; however, those efforts can be stymied with the winds of
partisanship and political administration. Even without the issues
raised by a potential citizenship question, decreased or flat-lined
funding has left the Census Bureau understaffed and unable to
thoroughly test new methodologies [32].
In sum, the act of classification cannot be divorced from the
group who is doing the classification and the organizational and
institutional pressures of performing classification. Racial classifi-
cation has a long history within quantitative social science, and,
in some ways, is the reason that social statistics have developed
the way they did. That history is grounded in eugenicist thought
and practice, and much of that work provided the infrastructure
for census-taking in the US, Canada, Latin America, and South
Africa. More expansive categorization resulted from social and po-
litical movements in those countries. In short, categorization itself
is a technological infrastructure within which institutional racism
continues to reside. In this way, we can realize the ways in which
race intersects with technology but also as a technology in and
of itself. The framing of race as technology shifts the terrain of
the discussion – rather, from what race is and how we can classify
individuals, to what we can do with race and how to make it do
different (and explicitly anti-racist) things.
3.2 The multidimensionality of race
As highlighted by the 1960 Census shift from ascribed to self-
identification, classification is largely contingent on the particular
appraisal of race used. When we say "race", we may be discussing
self-identification, but we also may be referring to phenotypical
features or observed assessments from third parties. Racial classifi-
cations are uneasily balanced not only on the particular unstable
equilibrium of racial projects, but also on the micro-level processes
of race appraisals themselves. When it comes to measurement and
operationalization, "race" is not a single variable, but many differ-
ing and sometimes competing variables. Roth [95] refers to this
constellation of variables as the "multiple dimensions" of race. Race
manifests in many ways in the real world. Each of these different
dimensions can be measured in a different manner for empirical
research, and each of these different dimensions have distinct down-
stream outcomes. It may therefore be more appropriate to study a
particular outcome using measurement which reflects a respective
dimension of race. Table 1 reproduces, with minor amendments,
the table from [95] which outlines each of these dimensions.
Racial identity and racial self-classification refer to subjective
self-identification of race. In theory, self-identification is one di-
mension but in practice these two are measured in different ways
and have differing downstream outcomes. Racial identity can be
thought of as the sense of self, the identity and broad group with
which someone belongs. Accordingly, its measurement instrument
is that of an open-ended interviewer or survey question. Racial
self-classification refers to the discrete categories that one marks
on intake forms, census surveys, and self-identification documents
for employment. This dimension, as noted earlier, is highly con-
strained by the categories determined a priori by institutional and
organizational directives, such as OMB Directive No. 15.
Observed race refers to the race which others believe ascribed
to an individual. This may be based upon first impression by an
interviewer or annotator. The third-party can make an assessment
based solely on appearance or interaction. Appearance-based ob-
served race depends on readily observable characteristics, whereas
interaction-based observed race depends on language, accent, and
other physical, aural, or social cues. Reflected race is the race which
an individual believes that others ascribe to them. Although this
is a first-person evaluation, it is the first-person evaluation of a
third-party appraisal.
Phenotype refers to the set of objective characteristics which
characterize appearance. A significant literature revolves around
skin color appraisals as a means for determining particular social
outcomes (e.g. [82, 114]) and the use of skin color as a means of eval-
uating facial recognition systems (e.g. [22, 92]). Other race-related
phenotypical features include hair texture and color, eye shape and
color, and lip shape. The related outcomes for phenotypical features
are the same as those for observed race, but are not constrained in
measurement by discrete racial categorization3.
The dimensions of race noted here are, of course, unstable across
time, place, and context. Just as racial classifications themselves
are tied to particular racial projects, modes of self-identification,
observed race, and reflected race will be tied to the dynamics of
that project. Self-identification has been shown to be responsive to
one’s arrest records [89] and to one’s class position [115]. Observed
race depends on the interviewer or annotator who is doing the
observing. Reflected race depends not only on phenotype but also
on the social status of the group in which the individual believes
they are being recognized as. These positions shift across time,
not only across the life course but also across the longue durée of
different racial projects.
Three major implications follow from the of multiple dimensions
paradigm. The first is that there may be inconsistencies across dif-
ferent dimensions of race. A single individual can have differing
racial appraisals. In the health field, for instance, Roth cites several
studies in which individual self-identification differs from medical
records, interviewer classifications, or death certificates. Second,
3In a sense, the "observed race/appearance-based" dimension and the phenotype
dimension are collapsed for computer vision systems, because a computer vision
system can only "see" the objective and phenotypical.
the dimensions can cross the boundaries between each other. Phe-
notype and reflected race can impact self-identification but do not
fully determine it. However, the third and most important implica-
tion, also highlighted in Table 1, is that different dimensions will
be associated with differing outcomes. Therefore, using a measure-
ment of race which does not reflect social processes associated
with it may misrepresent the scope of racial disparities at best and
underreport them at worst.
4 LESSONS FROM OTHER DISCIPLINES
The variance in what the concept of race can mean has been noted
as "antithetical to the tenets of scientific research, which, in its
ideal form, demands that analytical variables be consistent and
their categories mutually exclusive" [70]. Yet, the social centrality
of race positions it as a critical concept in many fields of study. In
this section, we review how other disciplines, such as public health
research, biomedical research, and studies of social inequality, have
grappled with the use of racial categories within their disciplines.
We surface these discussions to understand how algorithmic fair-
ness research can learn from these methodological approaches.
4.1 Limitations in operationalizing race
Scholars from a range of disciplines have observed a widespread
lack of clarity around the use of racial variables within their respec-
tive fields. Race is often inconsistently conceptualized andmeasured
across studies; definitions and processes of operationalization tend
to be insufficiently documented. These inconsistencies pose serious
challenges for the validity and utility of research results. For exam-
ple, inconsistent categories and classification schemes can result
in mismatches between different measures of race for the same
individual across different time points or across studies. This in
turn can significantly impact health statistics [62, 101], population
statistics [8, 74], and measures of social inequality [102]. Country-
specific understandings of what "race" references and local racial
categorization schemes pose significant challenges for international
comparisons [96].
Standardizing racial taxonomies andmeasurement practices does
not sufficiently mitigate the many concerns scholars have raised
regarding the use of racial categories in scientific studies. In fact, the
widespread uncritical adoption of racial categories, standardized
or not, can erode awareness of the social and political histories of
racial taxonomies and reify racial categories as natural kinds [19, 30,
42, 43, 78, 100, 111]. The reification of race as a natural category can
in turn re-entrench systems of racial stratification which give rise to
real health and social inequalities between different groups [62, 110].
The unquestioning use of racial categories in scientific research
can also lead to misplaced conclusions. For example, the use of race
as a natural category can obfuscate the environmental, social, and
structural factors that contribute to health disparities [29, 110] and
lead to the racialization of certain diseases [19, 30, 37]. The genomic
era in particular has given rise to new concerns regarding the use of
race in technologies and research. Race-based pharmaceuticals have
been critiqued for their part in reifying racial categories as markers
of biological difference [59, 63]. Genetic ancestry testing has been
criticized for its potential to promote biological essentialilsm and
reinforce race privilege amongst those already experiencing it [15,
Dimension Description Typical Measurement Outcomes it may be appropriate for
studying
Racial identity Subjective self-identification, not
limited by pre-set options.
Open-ended self-identification
question
Political mobilization; assimilation;
social networks; voting; residential
decision-making; attitudes
Racial Self-Classification The race you check on an official
form or survey with constrained
options (e.g. the Census)
Closed-ended survey question Demographic change; vital statis-
tics; disease and illness rates
Observed Race The race others believe you to be Interviewer classification Discrimination; socioeconomic dis-
partiies; residential segregation;
criminal justice indicators; health
care/service provision
- Appearance-Based Observed race based on readily ob-
servable characteristics
Interviewer classification with in-
structions to classify on first obser-
vation
Racial profiling; discrimination in
public settings
- Interaction-Based Observed race based on character-
istics revealed through interaction
(e.g. language, accent, surname)
Interview classification with in-
structions to classify after interac-
tion or survey
Workplace discrimination; housing
discrimination; language/accent-
based discrimination
Reflected Race The race you believe others as-
sume you to be
A question such as "What race do
most people think you are?"
Self-identification processes; per-
ceived discrimination
Phenotype Racial appearance Usually interviewer classification,
but also "objective" characteristics
such as: skin color; hair texture and
color; nose shape; lip shape; eye
color
Discrimination; socioeconomic dis-
partiies; residential segregation;
criminal justice indicators; health
care/service provision
Table 1: Multiple dimensions of race. Reproduced and amended from [95]. Note that we have excluded "racial ancestry" from
this table. Genetics, biomedical researchers, and sociologists of science have criticized the use of "race" to describe genetic
ancestry within biomedical research [40, 49, 84, 122], while others have criticized the use of direct-to-consumer genetic testing
and its implications for racial and ethnic identification [15, 91, 113].
98]. Finally, bioinformatics tools and research practices themselves
contribute to the essentialization of race [10, 42, 43, 51].
There has also been significant debate about the appropriate
use of racial variables in studies aimed at identifying causal ef-
fects [46, 54, 55, 58, 67]. Objections to the use of race as a causal
variable are often couched in terms of manipulability, embodied
by the slogan "no causation without manipulation" [54]. These
arguments often point to the physical impossibility of manipu-
lating race, thus precluding its use as a causal variable. Several
additional, more sociologically-grounded objections to the use of
race as a causal variable have emerged within social statistics [55],
anti-discrimination legal scholarship [67], and health research [46].
These objections point to the fundamental role race plays in struc-
turing life experiences, making it nonsensical to talk about two
individuals being identical, save for race. Stated another way, at-
tempts to isolate the treatment effect of race are often based on a
"sociologically incoherent conception of what race references" [67].
Several scholars have pointed to the significant social conse-
quences that arise when race is misconstrued as a variable that
can produce causal effects [3, 46, 58, 124]. First, without proper
contextualization of results, there is a tendency to misattribute the
causal mechanisms of difference the racial categories themselves
[3, 46, 124], further reifying race as a natural category. Second,
misidentifying race, rather than racial stratification, as the root
cause of social and health disparities can lead to misplaced conclu-
sions and ineffective public policy interventions [46].
4.2 Critical race methodologies
These critiques have given rise to a host of critical race methodolo-
gies informing the use of racial categories within these respective
disciplines. To begin, the choice to use racial categories at all should
be carefully examined, particularly in biological contexts. Despite
widespread agreement that racial categories do not describe geneti-
cally distinct populations [84], genomics researchers have grappled
for over a decade with the utility and harm of using racial categories
to frame research studies and communicate scientific results. The
context of use is key to assessing the appropriate use of racial cate-
gories. For example, when adopted as a social or political category,
race has utility in genomics, e.g. to document biological differences
that result from processes of racial stratification. However, when
disconnected from their social and political histories, racial cate-
gories have no place in biological research [30, 90, 122]. Genetics,
biomedical researchers, and sociologists of science have emphasized
the importance of distinguishing ancestry from racial taxonomies
within biomedical research [40, 49, 84] and have warned against the
dangers of of using racial categories to describe genetic variation
[14, 30, 122].
As noted above in our discussion of Benthall and Haynes, race
cannot and should not be done away with entirely. The key chal-
lenge here is to "denaturalize without dematerializing it" [78] by rec-
ognizing race as amultidimensional, relational, and socially situated
construct. This begins with centering the process of conceptualizing
and operationalizing race, critically assessing the choice of cate-
gories and measurement schemes, and fully articulating and justify-
ing these decisions in academic communications [46, 60, 71, 77, 83].
In the context of causal studies, several methodologies have
been proposed to mitigate the risks of reifying race as an entity
that produces causal effects. For example, some researchers have
considered studies that manipulate properties associated with race,
such as names [13] 4. Sen andWasow’s ’bundle of sticks’ framework
theorizes race as a composite variable that can be disaggregated
into constitutive elements, some of which can be manipulated [109].
Epidemiological and public health researchers have increasingly
shifted their practices towards the study of social determinants of
health, and in particular, the multiple ways racism affects health
outcomes [41, 61, 71, 117, 119, 120]. This shift from studying effects
of race to the effects of racism is a central component of critical
race methodologies emerging within other disciplines. For instance,
Ford and Hawara propose a methodology for the operationalization
of race within health equity studies as a multidimensional, context-
specific variable with a relational component to explicitly capture
the effects of racial stratification on health outcomes [34].
Moreover, appropriately contextualized descriptive studies can
be an important tool for identifying and understanding patterns
of inequality. When race is utilized as a descriptive category, the
choices about what categories to use and how to assign individuals
to categories significantly impacts the results of analysis [18, 102,
114, 115]. For example, Howell and Emerson compare the effec-
tiveness of five different operationalizations of race in predicting
different measures of social inequality. The study found each oper-
ationalization told a different story, pointing to the importance of
critically evaluating racial categories and measurement schemes,
as well as the importance of articulating these decisions in the
communication of results [56].
In recent years, anti-racist efforts have emerged within pub-
lic health that more thoroughly integrate critical race theory into
methodologies and discourse [35, 36]. While earlier studies of the
social determinants of health tend to center individual and interper-
sonal racialized experiences, this new paradigm shifts focus to the
institutional and structural conditions that shape racial disparities
in health [44, 45, 110, 118]. Anti-racist practice also emphasizes
the importance of researchers recognizing their privilege and posi-
tionality and the way this might shape their practice. For example,
the Public Health Critical Race Praxis offers a self-reflexive and
race-conscious research methodology that centers discourse and
practice around the perspectives of socially marginalized groups,
building on community-based participatory approaches [35].
4However, Kohler-Hausmann has been critical of such "audit" studies for not being
able to isolate the treatment effect for race, although they do, in some circumstances,
"provide evidence of a constitutive claim that grounds a thick ethical evaluation" [67,
pp. 33-34]
5 IMPLICATIONS FOR USING RACE IN
ALGORITHMIC FAIRNESS RESEARCH
We observe several widespread tendencies when using race within
algorithmic fairness research. First, frameworks for describing and
mitigating unfairness adopt a simplistic conceptualization of race
as a single dimensional variable that can take on a handful of val-
ues. This simplification erases the social, economic, and political
complexity of the racial categories. Further, methodologies built
upon this conceptualization of race tend to treat groups as inter-
changeable, obscuring the unique oppressions encountered by each
group. We argue that this framing limits the effectiveness of fair-
ness analysis and interventions and risks reifying racial categories
in the process.
Second, the process of conceptualizing and operationalizing race
for the purposes of studying or mitigating different aspects of algo-
rithmic fairness has – with the exceptions noted above – received
little attention. Moreover, racial categories are frequently adopted
with little attention given to the histories of the categories or suit-
ability of the categories for the fairness assessment.
We discuss the importance of focusing on categories and mea-
surement processes, and fully articulating these decisions in com-
munication of results. Lastly, we discuss the use of disaggregated
analysis and the implications for incorporating a more nuanced
understanding of measurement for these analyses.
5.1 Race and group fairness
Group fairness criteria represent a class of algorithmic fairness
definitions predicated on clearly defined subgroups in the dataset.
"Fairness" is obtained by equalizing a particular statistic, or set
of statistics, of the classifier across groups. Many different group
fairness criteria have been proposed. For example, demographic
parity requires equal rates of positive prediction [33] across groups.
Equality of odds [50], also referred to as equalized mistreatment
[123], requires equal false positive and false negative rates across
groups. Equal opportunity [50] restricts this requirement to only
a single value of the true outcome. Calibration (or test fairness)
[23, 66] requires the actual outcome to be independent of protected
attributes, conditioned on estimated outcome.
While limitations of group fairness criteria have been previously
explored [26, 47], here we focus our examination on the conceptu-
alization of race embedded within this framework. By abstracting
racial categories into a mathematically comparable form, group-
based fairness criteria deny the hierarchical nature and the social,
economic, and political complexity of the social groups under con-
sideration. Most notably, critical race theorists and Black feminist
thinkers have criticized group fairness approaches for their under-
lying ideal, liberal approaches to ameliorating past harms.
Black feminist cultural geographer Katherine McKittrick, fol-
lowing Patricia Hill Collins, discusses how such approaches have
resulted in a ’flattened geography’ which obscures the unique op-
pressions encountered by Black women, instead treating oppressed
social groups as interchangeable [25, 79]. Ladson-Billings and Tate,
in their critical race critique of liberal education paradigms, explain
that the tension between and even among different racial groups are
not adequately examined or understood and assume "that all differ-
ence is both analogous and equivalent" [68]. Political philosopher
Charles W. Mills notes that the liberal underpinnings of both theo-
retical and methodological approaches towards equalization have
historically tended to have significant detrimental consequences
for racial minorities and only serves to advance a white "racial
contract" [80].
In short, group fairness approaches try to achieve sameness
across groups without regard for the difference between the groups.
Group fairness offers an incomplete version ofwhat a race-conscious
policy would be. This treats everyone the same from an algo-
rithmic perspective without acknowledging that people are not
treated the same. As political philosopher Elizabeth Anderson notes,
"[s]tandard conceptions of distributive equality, embodied in ideas
of equality of opportunity... fail to consider how such opportunities
build in group hierarchy" [4].
5.2 Conceptualizing and operationalizing race
The question of how best to operationalize race for the purposes
of studying or mitigating different aspects of algorithmic unfair-
ness has received little attention. By discounting the considerations
that go into operationalizing race, the scope and effectiveness of
subsequent analysis and interventions fail to interrogate how the
particular operationalization and measurement affect a given out-
come. For instance, referring to Table 1, while observed race may
be more important for studying discrimination, self-identification
may be more suitable for studying identity formation and voting
behavior.
We suggest centering the process of conceptualizing and opera-
tionalizing race when working with racial variables. In particular,
we urge algorithmic fairness researchers to critically evaluate exist-
ing racial schemas. Because of data limitations, we are most often
bound to the categories provided by census categories or other
taxonomies which stem from bureaucratic processes. We know
from the histories outlined above that these categories are unstable,
contingent, and rooted in racial inequality.
Following recent work around measurement and fairness [5, 57],
we suggest taking seriously the problems of measurement modeling
when considering racial variables. Race, like fairness, is itself a
contested concept, and it follows that adopting a multidimensional
view is one strategy forward for approaching this. Recently, Roth
has called more broadly for a "sociology of racial appraisals" in
which we better theorize how observed race has changed over time,
and how these changes influence norms of classification [97]. Given
that most, if not all, of algorithmic fairness research is ostensibly
concerned with anti-discrimination, this charge should be taken
seriously.
As a helpful analogue, a growing body of survey research has
highlighted the impact that racial category andmeasurement choices
can have on outcomes being measured [102–104]. Similarly, we
emphasize that the various choices that go into the operational-
ization of race for the purposes of fairness-informed analysis or
interventions significantly impact the result. Therefore, we need
to be transparent about definitions, categories, measurements, and
motivations for racial schema used in research and publication. If
possible, multiple measures of race should be collected. In addition,
measurement of race should be considered as an empirical problem
in its own right.
In domains where the categorization is based solely on observ-
able characteristics, e.g. image datasets are annotated by third-
parties, care needs to be taken to ensure race is not reduced to
phenotype. This consideration can inform how the subgroups them-
selves are defined (e.g. shifting conceptually from racial categories
to categories defined along phenotypic lines) and the way in which
the dataset and analysis results are communicated with the larger
research community (e.g. detailing procedures for determining cate-
gories and category membership, ensuring a distinction is made be-
tween phenotypically-determined categories and high-level racial
categories). In the context of disaggregated evaluations in computer
vision domains, the FAT* community has already seen a marked
shift towards defining groups based on phenotypic properties rather
than racial categories, thanks to the pioneering work of Buolamwini
and colleagues.
However, we also note that shifting to phenotypically-determined
categories does not provide a full-stop solution. Given the dark his-
tory of physiognomy and phrenology [121], in particular their role
in promoting scientific racism and eugenics, researchers should
be careful when imposing categories based on, for example, facial
landmarks (e.g. IBM’s diversity in faces dataset has labelled facial
dimensions, proportions, etc.). Doing so risks devolving into using
phenotypical features as inputs for a predictive models for individ-
ual characteristics and internal psychological states. Furthermore,
while phenotype can be used as a means to understand processes of
discrimination, practitioners should not equate race to phenotype,
not to mention other biological markers such as genomes.
5.3 Disaggregated analysis
Frameworks for algorithmic audit studies [22, 92] and standardized
model reporting guidelines [81] have highlighted the importance
of reporting model statistics disaggregated by groups defined along
cultural, demographic, or phenotypic lines. In contrast to group
fairness definitions, which are often employed as ideals to be met,
disaggregated analysis operates at a descriptive level. These analy-
ses should begin from a pragmatist understanding of differences
and interrogate the most salient aspects of race to be considered for
particular technologies. For instance, in their audits of facial anal-
ysis technologies, Buolamwini and her colleagues concentrate on
the phenotypical dimensions of race to understand the disparities
of these vision-based systems5. Results of disaggregated analysis
depend heavily on the choice of categories and racial measurements
used.
Within survey research, sociologists of race have investigated
the utility of different racial categories for the purposes of under-
standing markers of social inequality. Howell and Emerson find that
a five-fold measure of self-identified race explains more variation
in measures of inequality in income, housing, and health in the US
[56]. Saperstein and Penner find that racial categorization operates
both as an input and an output to racial inequality. Individuals who
experience an increase in social position (e.g. increased income)
may be more likely to "lighten" themselves in survey responses,
while those who become more disadvantaged (e.g. experiencing
unemployment or incarceration) may "darken" themselves [89, 105].
The implication here is that it is necessary to understand the way
5It should be noted that they do not take a similar approach towards gender.
that a particular racial dimension manifests in measurement and
how it relates to the sociotechnical system under consideration. We
encourage algorithmic fairness researchers to explore how different
racial dimensions and their attendant measurements might reveal
different patterns of unfairness in sociotechnical systems.
5.4 Limits of the algorithmic frame
Before undertaking the project of systematizing social groups based
on race, we should begin by interrogating why race is a relevant
factor in the analysis of the system to begin with. Here, it is criti-
cal to expand the scope of analysis beyond the algorithmic frame
[108] and interrogate how patterns of racial oppression might be
embedded in the data and model and might interact with the re-
sulting system. We urge researchers to question the following: is
delineating data along racial lines critical to understanding patterns
of fairness produced or reproduced by the system?
In many cases, severe fairness concerns are evident prior to
any quantitative race-based analysis of the system’s outputs. For
example, Rashida Richardson and colleagues recently published
an extensive survey of the "dirty data" used to develop predictive
policing systems in the US [94]. The report reveals that in nine out
of the thirteen jurisdictions reviewed, predictive policing systems
ingested data that was generated while the jurisdiction was un-
der investigation for corrupt, racially-biased, or otherwise illegal
policing practices. This work represents an analysis centered not
around race but around racially disparate policing patterns. This
echoes much of the work from within health and biomedical sci-
ences which emphasizes a racism effect rather than a race effect.
5.5 Centering perspectives of marginalized
groups
Lastly, interventions in the vein of algorithmic fairness need to con-
sider the problems of the racially oppressed based on their view of
injustices. Political philosopher Elizabeth Anderson proposes that
we think about injustices from what she calls a non-ideal standpoint
methodology [4]. The methodology is non-ideal insofar as that it
views injustices from the point of view of the aggrieved groups and
the particular harms these groups are facing. The methodology is
"standpoint"-based insofar as we should begin from the perspec-
tives of oppressed groups. Here, we can draw lessons from public
health scholars who prioritize community-based participatory ap-
proaches. These methodologies, which are grounded in critical race
theory and feminist standpoint epistemology, take lived experi-
ences of marginalized groups as a valuable and essential source of
knowledge.
6 CONCLUSION
In this article, we have pulled back the frame from the algorithms
involved in algorithmic fairness themselves and focused on the cat-
egories which constitute the "protected classes" used within these
frameworks. We focus on race, given the critical nexus of race,
technology, and inequality, and the prevalence of race in algorith-
mic fairness scholarship. We traced the histories of classification,
eugenics, and state-sponsored category creation, and warned of the
tendency to reify and naturalize racial categories which were the
product of long histories of inequality. We then noted the multidi-
mensionality of race and considered lessons from disciplines which
have been dealing with this issue for decades. Lastly, we review
the algorithmic fairness literature in light of these considerations.
We highlight limitations of algorithmic fairness methodologies that
adopt a simplistic and de-contextualized understanding of race and
outline several suggestions for algorithmic fairness researchers
moving forward.
Most in the FAT* community are what Ruha Benjamin calls
the "overserved" [11]. In this light, racial classifications need to
be interrogated from the perspective of who they serve. Who is
doing the categorizing and for what purpose? As in the beginning
of this article, we echo J. Khadijah Abdurahman, "it is not just
that classification systems are inaccurate or biased, it is who has
the power to classify, to determine the repercussions / policies
associated thereof and their relation to historical and accumulated
injustice." Racial classifications can be an important tool in post-
hoc disaggregation analysis. However, we need to know how to
disaggregate, how to contextualize categories of disaggregation,
and who that categorization serves.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks to Anna Lauren Hoffmann, Ben Hutchinson, Emma Kaywin,
Issa Kohler-Haussman, Joan Fujimura, LaurenMangels, SimoneWu,
and the three anonymous FAT* reviewers for helpful comments.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Khadijah Abdurahman. 2019. Fat* be wilin’.
[2] Syed Mustafa Ali. 2016. A brief introduction to decolonial computing. XRDS:
Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students, 22(4):16–21.
[3] Walter R Allen, Susan A Suh, Gloria González, and Joshua Yang. 2008. Qui bono?
explaining–or defending–winners and losers in the competition for educational
achievement. In Tukufu Zuberi and Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, editors, White logic,
white methods : racism and methodology, chapter 13, pages 217–237. Rowman
& Littlefield Publishers.
[4] Elizabeth Anderson. 2009. Toward a non-ideal, relational methodology for political
philosophy: Comments on schwartzman’s "challenging liberalism". Hypatia,
24(4):130–145.
[5] McKane Andrus and Thomas K Gilbert. 2019. Towards a just theory of measurement:
A principled social measurement assurance program for machine learning.
In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society,
pages 445–451. ACM.
[6] Julia Angwin and Jeff Larson. 2016. Propublica responds to company’s critique of
machine bias story. ProPublica, 29.
[7] Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. 2016. Machine bias.
ProPublica.
[8] Stanley R. Bailey, Mara Loveman, and Jeronimo O. Muniz. 2013. Measures of "race"
and the analysis of racial inequality in brazil. Social Science Research, 42(1):106
– 119.
[9] Chelsea Barabas, Karthik Dinakar, Joichi Ito, Madars Virza, and Jonathan Zittrain. 2017.
Interventions over predictions: Reframing the ethical debate for actuarial risk
assessment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.08238.
[10] Jan Baren-Nawrocka. 2013. The bioinformatics of genetic origins: how identities
become embedded in the tools and practices of bioinformatics. Life Sciences,
Society and Policy, 9:7, 09 2013.
[11] Ruha Benjamin. 2019. Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim
Code. John Wiley & Sons.
[12] Sebastian Benthall and Bruce D. Haynes. 2019. Racial categories in machine
learning. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency, FAT* ’19.
[13] Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. Are Emily and Greg More Em-
ployable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Dis-
crimination. American Economic Review, 94(4):991–1013, September 2004.
[14] Catherine Bliss. 2011. Racial taxonomy in genomics. Social Science & Medicine,
73(7):1019 – 1027.
[15] Deborah A Bolnick, Duana Fullwiley, Troy Duster, Richard S Cooper, Joan H
Fujimura, Jonathan Kahn, Jay S Kaufman, Jonathan Marks, Ann Morning, Alon-
dra Nelson, et al. 2007. The science and business of genetic ancestry testing. Science,
318(5849):399–400.
[16] Eduardo Bonilla-Silva and Tukufu Zuberi. 2008. Toward a definition of white logic
and white methods. In Tukufu Zuberi and Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, editors, White
logic, white methods: racism and methodology, chapter 1, pages 3–27. Rowman
& Littlefield Publishers.
[17] Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2011. Sorting Things Out. MIT Press, 2000.
[18] Jenifer Bratter and Bridget K Gorman. 2011. Does multiracial matter? a study of racial
disparities in self-rated health. Demography, 48:127–52, 02 2011.
[19] Lundy Braun, Anne Fausto-Sterling, Duana Fullwiley, Evelynn Hammonds,
Alondra Nelson, William Quivers, Susan Reverby, and Alexandra E Shields. 2007.
Racial categories in medical practice: How useful are they? PLoS medicine,
4:e271, 10 2007.
[20] Andre Brock. 2009. Life on the wire: Deconstructing race on the internet. Information,
Communication & Society, 12(3):344–363, 2009.
[21] Simone Browne. 2015. Dark matters: On the surveillance of blackness. Duke Univer-
sity Press, 2015.
[22] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. 2018. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy
disparities in commercial gender classification. In FAT*, pages 77–91, 2018.
[23] Alexandra Chouldechova. 2017. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of
bias in recidivism prediction instruments. Big Data, 5 2:153–163, 2017.
[24] Wendy Hui Kyong Chun. 2009. Introduction: Race and/as Technology; or, How to Do
Things to Race. Camera Obscura: Feminism, Culture, and Media Studies, 24(1
(70)):7–35, 05 2009.
[25] Patricia Hill Collins. 1998. Fighting words: Black women and the search for justice,
volume 7. U of Minnesota Press, 1998.
[26] Sam Corbett-Davies and Sharad Goel. 2018. The measure and mismeasure of fairness:
A critical review of fair machine learning. In arXiv:1808.00023, 2018.
[27] Matthew Desmond and Mustafa Emirbayer. 2009. What is racial domination? Du
Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race, 6(2):335–355, 2009.
[28] William Dieterich, Christina Mendoza, and Tim Brennan. 2016. COMPAS risk scales:
Demonstrating accuracy equity and predictive parity. Northpoint Inc, 2016.
[29] Denise J. Drevdahl, Debby A. Philips, and Janette Y. Taylor. 2006. Uncontested cat-
egories: the use of race and ethnicity variables in nursing research. Nursing
Inquiry, 13(1):52–63, 2006.
[30] Troy Duster. 2005. Race and reification in science. Science, 307(5712):1050–1051,
2005.
[31] Dave Elder-Vass. 2012. Towards a realist social constructionism. Sociologia,
problemas e práticas, (70):9–24, 2012.
[32] Diana Elliott, Rob Santos, Steven Martin, and Charmaine Runes. 2019. Assessing
miscounts in the 2020 census.
[33] Michael Feldman, Sorelle A. Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and
Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2015. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In
Proceedings of the 21th ACMSIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’15, pages 259–268, New York, NY, USA, 2015.
ACM.
[34] Chandra Ford and Nina Harawa. 2010. A new conceptualization of ethnicity for social
epidemiologic and health equity research. Social science & Medicine, 71:251–8,
07 2010.
[35] Chandra L. Ford. 2016. Public health critical race praxis: An introduction, an inter-
vention, and three points for consideration. Wisconsin Law Review, 3:477–491,
01 2016.
[36] Chandra L. Ford and Collins Airhihenbuwa. 2010. Critical race theory, race equity,
and public health: Toward antiracism praxis. American Journal of Public Health,
100 Suppl 1:S30–5, 02 2010.
[37] Morris W. Foster and Richard R Sharp. 2002. Race, ethnicity, and genomics: social
classifications as proxies of biological heterogeneity. Genome research, 12
6:844–50, 2002.
[38] Michel Foucault. 2005. The order of things. Routledge, 2005.
[39] Marion Fourcade and Kieran Healy. 2016. Seeing like a market. Socio-Economic
Review, 15(1):9–29, 2016.
[40] Joan H Fujimura, Deborah A Bolnick, Ramya Rajagopalan, Jay S Kaufman,
Richard C Lewontin, Troy Duster, Pilar Ossorio, and Jonathan Marks. 2014. Clines
without classes: How to make sense of human variation. Sociological Theory,
32(3):208–227, 2014.
[41] Mindy Fullilove. 1998. Comment: Abandoning "race" as a variable in public health
research - an idea whose time has come. American Journal of Public Health,
88:1297–8, 10 1998.
[42] Duana Fullwiley. 2008. The molecularization of race: Institutionalizing human differ-
ence in pharmacogenetics practice. Science as Culture, 16(1):1–30, 2007.
[43] Duana Fullwiley. 2008. The biologistical construction of race. Social studies of science,
38:695–735, 11 2008.
[44] Jennifer Garcìa and Mienah Sharif. 2015. Black lives matter: A commentary on racism
and public health. American Journal of Public Health, 105:e1–e4, 06 2015.
[45] Gilbert Gee and Devon Payne-Sturges. 2005. Environmental health dispari-
ties: A framework integrating psychosocial and environmental concepts.
Environmental health perspectives, 112:1645–53, 01 2005.
[46] Laura E. Gomez and Nancy Lopez, editors. 2013. Mapping Race: Critical Approaches
to Health Disparities Research. New Brunswick, NJ, Rutgers University Press,
2013.
[47] Ben Green and Lily Hu. 2018. The myth in the methodology: Towards a recontextual-
ization of fairness in machine learning. In ICML 2018.
[48] Ian Hacking. 1999. The social construction of what? Harvard university press, 1999.
[49] Nina T Harawa and C. Lawrence Ford. 2009. The foundation of modern racial
categories and implications for research on black/white disparities in health.
Ethnicity & Disease, 19 2:209–17, 2009.
[50] Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nathan Srebro. 2016. Equality of opportunity in super-
vised learning. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, NIPS’16, pages 3323–3331, USA, 2016. Curran
Associates Inc.
[51] Alana Helberg-Proctor, Anja Krumeich, Agnes Meershoek, and Klasien
Horstman. 2017. The multiplicity and situationality of enacting ’ethnicity’ in dutch
health research articles. BioSocieties, 12 2017.
[52] Michael Herzfeld. 1993. The social production of indifference. University of Chicago
Press, 1993.
[53] Anna Lauren Hoffmann. 2019. Where fairness fails: data, algorithms, and the lim-
its of antidiscrimination discourse. Information, Communication & Society,
22(7):900–915, 2019.
[54] Paul W. Holland. Statistics and causal inference. 1986. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 81(396):945–960, 1986.
[55] Paul W. Holland. 2008. Causation and race. In Tukufu Zuberi and Eduardo Bonilla-
Silva, editors, White logic, white methods : racism and methodology, chapter 5,
pages 93–109. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2008.
[56] Junia Howell and Michael Emerson. 2017. So what "should" we use? evaluating the
impact of five racial measures on markers of social inequality. Sociology of
Race and Ethnicity, 3:14–30, 5 2017.
[57] Abigail Z. Jacobs and Hanna Wallach. 2019. Measurement and fairness.
[58] Angela James. 2008. Making sense of race and racial classification. In Tukufu Zuberi
and Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, editors, White logic, white methods : racism and
methodology, chapter 2, pages 31–45. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2008.
[59] Jonathan Kahn. 2005. Misreading race and genomics after bidil. Nature genetics,
37:655–6, 08 2005.
[60] Judith B. Kaplan and Trude Bennett. 2003. Use of Race and Ethnicity in Biomedical
Publication. JAMA, 289(20):2709–2716, 2003.
[61] Jay Kaufman and Richard Cooper. 2001. Commentary: Considerations for use
of racial/ethnic classification in etiologic research. American journal of
epidemiology, 154:291–8, 09 2001.
[62] Jay S Kaufman. 1999. How inconsistencies in racial classification demystify the race
construct in public health statistics. Epidemiology, 10 2:101–3, 1999.
[63] Shannon Kelly and Yashwant Pathak. 2018. Race and Ethnicity: Understanding
Difference in the Genome Era, pages 71–87. 07 2018.
[64] Ibram X Kendi. 2017. Stamped from the beginning: The definitive history of racist
ideas in America. Random House, 2017.
[65] Akil Kokayi Khalfani, Tukufu Zuberi, Sulaiman Bah, and Pali J Lehohla. 2008. Race
and population statistics in south africa. In Tukufu Zuberi and Eduardo Bonilla-
Silva, editors, White logic, white methods: racism and methodology, chapter 4,
pages 63–92. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2008.
[66] Jon M. Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. 2017. Inherent trade-
offs in the fair determination of risk scores. In ITCS, 2017.
[67] Issa Kohler-Hausmann. 2019. EddieMurphy and the Dangers of Counterfactual Causal
Thinking About Detecting Racial Discrimination. Northwestern University Law
Review, 113(5), 2019.
[68] Gloria Ladson-Billings and William F Tate IV. 1995. Toward a critical race theory of
education. Teachers College Record, 97:47–68, 1995.
[69] Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, Lauren Kirchner, and Julia Angwin. 2016. How we analyzed
the compas recidivism algorithm. ProPublica, 9, 2016.
[70] Catherine Lee. 2009. "race" and "ethnicity" in biomedical research: How do scien-
tists construct and explain differences in health? Social Science & Medicine,
68(6):1183 – 1190, 2009.
[71] S Lin and J Kelsey. 2000. Use of race and ethnicity in epidemiologic research: Concepts,
methodological issues, and suggestions for research. Epidemiologic reviews,
22:187–202, 02 2000.
[72] Adam Liptak. 2019. Supreme court leaves census question on citizenship in doubt.
The New York Times, 2019.
[73] Ian Haney López. 2006. White by law: The legal construction of race. NYU Press,
2006.
[74] Mara Loveman, Jeronimo Muniz, and Stanley R. Bailey. 2012. Brazil in black and
white? race categories, the census, and the study of inequality. Ethnic and Racial
Studies, 35, 08 2012.
[75] Neda Maghbouleh. 2017. The Limits of Whiteness: Iranian Americans and the
Everyday Politics of Race. Stanford University Press, 2017.
[76] Douglas S Massey and Nancy A Denton. 1993. American apartheid: Segregation and
the making of the underclass. Harvard University Press, 1993.
[77] Vickie Mays, Ninez Ponce, Donna Washington, and Susan Cochran. 2003. Classifi-
cation of race and ethnicity: Implications for public health. Annual Review of
Public Health, 24:83–110, 02 2003.
[78] Amade M’charek. 2013. Beyond fact or fiction: On the materiality of race in practice.
Cultural Anthropology, 28:420–442, 07 2013.
[79] Katherine McKittrick. 2006. Demonic Grounds: Black Women and the Cartographies
of Struggle. University of Minnesota Press, ned - new edition edition, 2006.
[80] Charles W Mills. 1997. The racial contract. Cornell University Press, 1997.
[81] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasser-
man, Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. 2019.
Model cards for model reporting. In FAT, 2019.
[82] Ellis P Monk Jr. 2015. The cost of color: Skin color, discrimination, and health among
african-americans. American Journal of Sociology, 121(2):396–444, 2015.
[83] Edward Morris. 2007. Researching race: Identifying a social construction through
qualitative methods and an interactionist perspective. Symbolic Interaction,
30:409–425, 08 2007.
[84] Karama C. Neal. 2008. Use and Misuse of ’Race’ in Biomedical Research. Online
Journal of Health Ethics, 5(1), 2008.
[85] Safiya Umoja Noble. 2018. Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce
racism. nyu Press, 2018.
[86] Michael Omi and Howard Winant. 2014. Racial formation in the United States. Rout-
ledge, 2014.
[87] Michael A Omi. 2001. The changing meaning of race. America becoming: Racial
trends and their consequences, 1:243–263, 2001.
[88] Peggy Pascoe. 1996. Miscegenation law, court cases, and ideologies of "race" in
twentieth-century america. The Journal of American History, 83(1):44–69, 1996.
[89] Andrew M Penner and Aliya Saperstein. 2015. Disentangling the effects of racial
self-identification and classification by others: the case of arrest. Demography,
52(3):1017–1024, 2015.
[90] Elizabeth Phillips, Adebola Odunlami, and Vence Bonham. 2008. Mixed race: Un-
derstanding difference in the genome era. Social forces; a scientific medium of
social study and interpretation, 86:795–820, 01 2008.
[91] Ramya Rajagopalan and Joan H Fujimura. 2012. Making history via dna, making dna
from history. Genetics and the unsettled past: The collision of DNA, race, and
history, page 143, 2012.
[92] Inioluwa Deborah Raji and Joy Buolamwini. 2019. Actionable auditing: Investigating
the impact of publicly naming biased performance results of commercial ai
products. In AIES, 2019.
[93] Victor Ray. 2019. A theory of racialized organizations. American Sociological Review,
84(1):26–53, 2019.
[94] Rashida Richardson, Jason Schultz, and Kate Crawford. 2019. Dirty data, bad predic-
tions: How civil rights violations impact police data, predictive policing systems,
and justice. New York University Law Review, 2019.
[95] Wendy D Roth. 2016. The multiple dimensions of race. Ethnic and Racial Studies,
39(8):1310–1338, 2016.
[96] Wendy D. Roth. 2017. Methodological pitfalls of measuring race: international com-
parisons and repurposing of statistical categories. Ethnic and Racial Studies,
40(13):2347–2353, 2017.
[97] Wendy D Roth. 2018. Unsettled identities amid settled classifications? toward a
sociology of racial appraisals. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 41(6):1093–1112, 2018.
[98] Wendy D. Roth and Biorn Ivemark. 2018. Genetic options: The impact of genetic
ancestry testing on consumers’ racial and ethnic identities. American Journal
of Sociology, 124(1):150–184, 2018.
[99] Jacob S Rugh and Douglas S Massey. 2013. Racial segregation and the american
foreclosure crisis. American sociological review, 75(5):629–651, 2010.
[100] Phia Salter and Glenn Adams. 2013. Toward a critical race psychology. Social and
Personality Psychology Compass, 7, 11 2013.
[101] Gary D. Sandefur, Mary E. Campbell, and Jennifer Eggerling-Boeck. 2004. Racial and
ethnic disparities in health and mortality among the u.s. elderly population. In
Anderson NB, Bulatao RA, and Cohen B, editors, Critical Perspectives on Racial
and Ethnic Differences in Health in Late Life, pages 53–94. Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press, 2004.
[102] Aliya Saperstein. 2006. Double-checking the race box: Examining inconsistency
between survey measures of observed and self-reported race. Social Forces,
85(1):57–74, 2006.
[103] Aliya Saperstein. 2012. Capturing complexity in the united states: which aspects of
race matter and when? Ethnic and Racial Studies, 35(8):1484–1502, 2012.
[104] Aliya Saperstein, Jessica M Kizer, and Andrew M Penner. 2016. Making the most of
multiple measures: Disentangling the effects of different dimensions of race in
survey research. American Behavioral Scientist, 60(4):519–537, 2016.
[105] Aliya Saperstein and Andrew M Penner. 2012. Racial fluidity and inequality in the
united states. American Journal of Sociology, 118(3):676–727, 2012.
[106] James C Scott. 1998. Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human
condition have failed. Yale University Press, 1998.
[107] James C Scott. 2017. Against the grain: a deep history of the earliest states. Yale
University Press, 2017.
[108] Andrew D. Selbst, danah boyd, Sorelle A. Friedler, Suresh Venkatasubrama-
nian, and Janet Vertesi. 2019. Fairness and abstraction in sociotechnical systems. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
FAT* ’19, pages 59–68, New York, NY, USA, 2019. ACM.
[109] Maya Sen and Omar Wasow. 2016. Race as a bundle of sticks: Designs that estimate
effects of seemingly immutable characteristics. Annual Review of Political
Science, 19:499–522, 05 2016.
[110] Abigail A. Sewell. 2016. The racism-race reification process: A mesolevel political
economic framework for understanding racial health disparities. Sociology of
Race and Ethnicity, 2(4):402–432, 2016.
[111] Andrew Smart, Richard Tutton, Paul Martin, George T.H. Ellison, and Richard
Ashcroft. 2008. The standardization of race and ethnicity in biomedical science
editorials and uk biobanks. Social Studies of Science, 38(3):407–423, 2008.
[112] C Matthew Snipp. 2003. Racial measurement in the american census: Past practices
and implications for the future. Annual Review of Sociology, 29(1):563–588,
2003.
[113] Kim TallBear. 2013. Native American DNA: Tribal belonging and the false promise
of genetic science. U of Minnesota Press, 2013.
[114] Edward Telles, René D. Flores, and Fernando Urrea-Giraldo. 2015. Pigmentocracies:
Educational inequality, skin color and census ethnoracial identification in eight
latin american countries. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 40:39 –
58, 2015.
[115] Edward E. Telles and Nelson Lim. 1998. Does it matter who answers the race question?
racial classification and income inequality in brazil. Demography, 35(4):465–474,
1998.
[116] Charles Tilly. 1990. Coercion, Capital, and European States, AD 990-1992. B. Black-
well, 1990.
[117] David Williams and Pamela Braboy Jackson. 2005. Social sources of racial disparities
in health. Health affairs (Project Hope), 24:325–34, 03 2005.
[118] David Williams and Chiquita Collins. 2001. Racial residential segregation: A funda-
mental cause of racial disparities in health. Public Health Reports, 116:404–416,
09 2001.
[119] David R. Williams. 1994. The concept of race in health services research: 1966 to 1990.
Health Services Research, 29(3):261–274, 1994.
[120] David R. Williams and Michelle Sternthal. 2010. Understanding racial-ethnic dispari-
ties in health: sociological contributions. Journal of Health and Social Behavior,
51 Suppl(Suppl):S15–S27, 2010.
[121] Blaise Agüera y Arcas, Margaret Mitchell, and Alexander Todorov. 2017. Physiog-
nomy’s new clothes. Medium, 2017.
[122] Michael Yudell, Dorothy Roberts, Rob DeSalle, and Sarah Tishkoff. 2016. Taking race
out of human genetics. Science, 351(6273):564–565, 2016.
[123] Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, and Krishna P.
Gummadi. 2017. Fairness beyond disparate treatment & disparate impact: Learn-
ing classification without disparate mistreatment. In Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’17, pages 1171–1180,
Republic and Canton of Geneva, Switzerland, 2017. International World Wide
Web Conferences Steering Committee.
[124] Tukufu Zuberi. 2000. Deracializing social statistics: Problems in the quantification
of race. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science,
568:172–185, 2000.
[125] Tukufu Zuberi. 2001. Thicker Than Blood: How Racial Statistics Lie. U of Minnesota
Press, 2001.
