“The Human Body is a Black Box”: Supporting Clinical Decision-Making with Deep Learning 
Mark Sendak 
 Duke Institute for Health 
Innovation 
 Durham NC USA 
 mark.sendak@duke.edu 
Joseph Futoma† 
 Engineering & Applied Sciences 
 Harvard University  
 Cambridge MA USA 
 jfutoma@seas.harvard.edu 
Armando Bedoya 
Pulmonology and Critical Care 
Duke School of Medicine    
Durham NC USA  
 armando.bedoya@duke.edu 
Madeleine Clare Elish 
  Data & Society Research  
Institute 
 New York NY USA 
 mcelish@datasociety.net 
William Ratliff 
 Duke Institute for Health 
Innovation 
 Durham NC USA 
william.ratliff@duke.edu 
Suresh Balu 
 Duke Institute for Health 
Innovation 
 Durham NC USA 
 suresh.balu@duke.edu 
Michael Gao 
 Duke Institute for Health 
Innovation 
 Durham NC USA 
 michael.gao@duke.edu 
Marshall Nichols 
 Duke Institute for Health 
Innovation 
 Durham NC USA 
 marshall.nichols@duke.edu 
Cara O’Brien                  
Hospital Medicine 
Duke School of Medicine    
Durham NC USA 
 cara.obrien@duke.edu 
ABSTRACT 
Machine learning technologies are increasingly developed for use 
in healthcare. While research communities have focused on 
creating state-of-the-art models, there has been less focus on real 
world implementation and the associated challenges to fairness, 
transparency, and accountability that come from actual, situated 
use. Serious questions remain underexamined regarding how to 
ethically build models, interpret and explain model output, 
recognize and account for biases, and minimize disruptions to 
professional expertise and work cultures. We address this gap in 
the literature and provide a detailed case study covering the 
development, implementation, and evaluation of Sepsis Watch, a 
machine learning-driven tool that assists hospital clinicians in the 
early diagnosis and treatment of sepsis. Sepsis is a severe 
infection that can lead to organ failure or death if not treated in 
time and is the leading cause of inpatient deaths in US hospitals. 
We, the team that developed and evaluated the tool, discuss our 
conceptualization of the tool not as a model deployed in the world 
but instead as a socio-technical system requiring integration into 
existing social and professional contexts. Rather than focusing 
solely on model interpretability to ensure fair and accountable 
machine learning, we point toward four key values and practices 
that should be considered when developing machine learning to 
support clinical decision-making: rigorously define the problem 
in context, build relationships with stakeholders, respect 
professional discretion, and create ongoing feedback loops with 
stakeholders. Our work has significant implications for future 
research regarding mechanisms of institutional accountability 
and considerations for responsibly designing machine learning 
systems. Our work underscores the limits of model 
interpretability as a solution to ensure transparency, accuracy, 
and accountability in practice. Instead, our work demonstrates 
other means and goals to achieve FATML values in design and in 
practice.   
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Computing methodologies ® Machine learning; • 
Human-centered computing ® Field study; • Social and 
professional topics ® Government technology policy 
KEYWORDS 
Deep learning; Interpretability; Medicine; Trust; Expertise 
ACM Reference format: 
Mark Sendak, Madeleine Elish, Michael Gao, Joseph Futoma, William 
Ratliff, Marshall Nichcols, Armando Bedoya, Suresh Balu, Cara O’Brien. 
2020. “The Human Body is a Black Box”: Supporting Clinical Decision-
Making with Deep Learning. In Proceedings of ACM Conference on 
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* 2020), January 
27-30. 2020. ACM, Barcelona, Spain, 10 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372827 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Machine learning technologies are increasingly developed for use 
in healthcare. From consumer facing apps to hospital readmission 
predictors, the healthcare industry includes a rapidly expanding 
†Joseph Futoma also retains a research position in the department of Statistics at 
Duke University 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this 
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. 
FAT* '20, January 27–30, 2020, Barcelona, Spain © 2020 Copyright is held by the 
owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6936-7/20/02. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372827  
 
 
 
set of use cases for machine learning applications [59]. The 
machine learning community has focused much research on 
creating state-of-the-art models, but there has been less focus on 
real world implementation and the associated challenges to 
fairness, transparency, and accountability that come from actual, 
situated use. Serious questions remain underexamined regarding 
how to ethically build models, interpret and explain model output, 
recognize and account for biases, and minimize disruptions to 
professional expertise and work cultures. 
This paper contributes a case study through which to examine 
how issues of transparency, trust, and accountability are grappled 
with in practice. We present an empirical case study covering the 
development, implementation, and evaluation of Sepsis Watch, a 
machine learning-driven tool that assists hospital clinicians in the 
early diagnosis and treatment of sepsis. Sepsis is an inflammatory 
response to infection that can lead to organ failure and is the 
leading cause of inpatient deaths in US hospital [47]. We, the 
authors, were part of the team developing and evaluating this tool 
and our case study is based on our practitioner and research 
experiences. 
Some of the unique challenges facing the development of 
Sepsis Watch were that sepsis is not only hard to predict but also 
lacks a universally accepted definition. A model to predict sepsis 
needed to articulate a ground truth where in fact there was none. 
Moreover, when and why sepsis develops is incompletely 
understood. These aspects contributed to a de-prioritization of 
model interpretability in favor of other ways to establish trust in 
the accuracy of the model with clinicians, including rigorous 
documentation and institution-specific validation and evaluation. 
At the same time, our interdisciplinary team approached the 
development of Sepsis Watch as the development of a socio-
technical system, not an isolated model. By using the term “socio-
technical system,” we mean to foreground the interconnected 
social and technical dimensions of a technology, in which, for 
instance, the use of a machine learning tool cannot be considered 
apart from the people and institutions who interact with the tool 
and the beliefs, contexts, and power hierarchies that shape its 
development and use. From this perspective, Sepsis Watch is a 
great deal more than a deep learning model that generates risk 
scores; it is a complex socio-technical system that combines 
technical and institutional infrastructures with professionals who 
are making critical and highly contextual decisions. 
In this paper, we present our approach and describe the 
processes of designing, developing, and implementing Sepsis 
Watch. We begin by situating our analysis in related work on 
machine learning healthcare applications and the literature on 
technology adoption in healthcare institutions. This is followed 
by an overview of the Sepsis Watch tool and a discussion of our 
work building trust and mechanisms of accountability at multiple 
levels of the project, over time and with different stakeholders. 
We employ the term trust to describe a belief held by individuals 
that the system in place is appropriate and accurate, and 
accountability to refer to the ways in which technologists and 
designers can be held responsible for the performance of the 
system. We also discuss the complexities of integrating the output 
of the model into clinical decision-making. Drawing on these 
experiences and observations, we conclude by presenting four key 
values and practices that should be considered when developing 
machine learning to support clinical decision-making: rigorously 
define the problem in context, build relationships with 
stakeholders, respect professional discretion, and create ongoing 
feedback loops with stakeholders. 
Our contribution to the growing literature on fair, 
accountable, and transparent machine learning (FATML) is two-
fold. First, we provide a detailed case study of a tool’s 
development and implementation, presenting empirical and 
socially-situated (as opposed to experimental) evidence of a tool 
in use and its intersections with existing FATML concerns. To our 
knowledge, Sepsis Watch is comparable to no other clinical 
decision support system, and is one of the first deep learning 
models to be fully integrated into routine clinical care. Second, we 
demonstrate the implications for trust, accountability, and 
transparency when a machine learning implementation is 
conceptualized not as a model deployed in the world but rather as 
a socio-technical system that must be integrated into existing 
social and professional contexts. From this perspective, model 
interpretability itself does not ensure a fair or accountable 
technology. Rather, our experience and discussion points toward 
significant alternative mechanisms to achieve FATML values in 
design and in practice. 
2 MACHINE LEARNING FOR HEALTHCARE 
The introduction of machine learning systems is often imagined 
as a profound disruption, leading to either a wholly transformed 
system or the demise of human expertise. In healthcare, 
technology implementation and adoption decisions are made at 
the leadership level and depend on regulatory and compliance 
oversight [23, 44]. There is limited literature on the nuances of 
how machine learning models challenge the ways healthcare 
organizations function and clinical professionals relate to their 
work. 
Debates about the introduction of new technologies into 
existing clinical care routines are far from new. There is much to 
be gained from understanding how previous technologies were 
introduced into healthcare settings, how they were perceived 
when they were new, and why some innovations are more 
successful than others. At the same time, big data and machine 
learning rightly seem to present unique challenges with 
consequences for fairness, transparency, and accountability that 
require new analyses and governance principles [6, 10, 29]. 
2.1 IS INTERPRETABILITY NECESSARY? 
Both researchers and practitioners have highlighted the potential 
opportunities and perils of machine learning for healthcare. 
Numerous reviews document the proliferation of machine 
learning models and the promise of these technologies to address 
challenges in healthcare [45, 59]. At the same time, concerns have 
been raised about the role machine learning technologies might 
play in exacerbating systemic inequities in healthcare, 
undercutting patient privacy, increasing surveillance of 
vulnerable populations, and “dehumanizing” medicine [17, 38, 41, 
60]. 
 
 
The need for interpretable or explainable machine learning has 
taken hold in the context of these concerns, as well as in the 
context of facilitating and regulating adoption. Many experts cite 
explainable machine learning as the answer to protecting patient 
safety and ensuring professional accountability [24, 49].  The US 
National Artificial Intelligence Research and Development 
Strategic Plan recently stated, “Truly trustworthy AI requires 
explainable AI... this requires a comprehensive understanding of 
the AI system by the human user and the human designer” [52]. 
While “trust” is not synonymous with adoption, in a highly 
regulated, risk-averse industry such as healthcare, “trust” is often 
necessary in order for adoption to occur. 
Several assumptions underlie the focus on explainability as the 
primary means by which to address concerns around 
accountability, transparency, trust, and adoption of machine 
learning in healthcare. First, professional clinicians are presumed 
to have substantial technical and quantitative expertise with 
which to engage with explainable machine learning and “to 
interrogate, understand, debug and even improve the machine 
learning system” [2]. A potential by-product of this engagement 
often left undiscussed is whether physicians want to be 
increasingly oriented towards technologies rather than patients. 
Many clinicians in fact hope for machine learning to level the field 
of medical knowledge and “lead to a new premium: to find and 
train doctors who have the highest level of emotional intelligence” 
[58].  
Second, professional clinicians often incorporate information 
into clinical decisions without a comprehensive understanding of 
the mechanism by which the information is generated. For 
example, specialized clinical pathologists analyze laboratory 
specimens such as blood to generate results that are utilized by 
non-specialist clinicians. Although non-specialist clinicians 
understand laboratory test operating characteristics such as 
sensitivity and specificity, they often lack insight into how exactly 
laboratory tests function. Regulatory regimes ensure that 
laboratory tests are reliable and promote trust amongst non-
specialist clinicians. In addition, as Atul Gawande warned newly 
minted physicians: “the volume and complexity of the knowledge 
that we need to master has grown exponentially beyond our 
capacity as individuals” [20]. Physicians who share this view 
prioritize the effective use of information in clinical decision 
making rather than comprehensive understanding of how 
information is generated. 
Moreover, the application of medical knowledge does not 
necessarily require the identification of causal relations. The 
human body is in many ways “a black box,” in which the causes 
and mechanisms of illnesses often elude explanation. In the case 
of sepsis, as we discuss in further detail below, this is particularly 
relevant. What should constitute an explainable algorithm in 
clinical practice when the definition and underlying 
pathophysiology of sepsis are incompletely understood in the first 
place? 
Finally, there remains a lack of consensus around what should 
or could constitute “interpretable” or “explainable” AI [13, 35, 37, 
61]. Recent work has emphasized that explanations cannot be an 
end in and of themselves, but must be enacted in the service of 
specific normative ends within broader social contexts [26, 51].  
2.2 ADOPTION OF HEALTH INNOVATIONS 
The challenges facing the introduction of machine learning into 
healthcare settings are an increasing point of discussion both in 
academic and popular literature. However, most discussions of 
machine learning adoption fail to place the current challenges in 
the context of broader innovation adoption theories. The actual 
mechanisms by which professionals trust, adopt, and use 
technologies are often an afterthought. Clinicians are rarely 
directly involved in the development of machine learning 
technologies [54] or discussions of explainability in healthcare 
[31]. Too often, the focus has been on the technical properties of 
the model, and in turn, the potential solutions are intrinsically 
technical. In contrast, innovation adoption theory focuses on the 
dimensions of technology use in organizational and professional 
contexts. 
Two features of innovative products that are highlighted 
across innovation adoption frameworks are perceived benefit and 
ease of use. The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) posits that 
perceived utility and ease of use shape attitudes towards an 
innovation, which in turn translates into intention to use and 
actual use [25]. The second framework, modeled after Rogers’ 
“Diffusion of Innovations”, extends these two properties to also 
include alignment with values and experiences of end users, 
ability to test an innovation, and the ability to watch others try an 
innovation first [5, 48]. In both frameworks, ease of use is distinct 
from comprehensive explainability. For example, Intermountain 
Health Care reduced the rate of pressure sores by 80% by distilling 
30-pages of guidelines into 2 simple, high-yield interventions [5]. 
Explanations may be retrievable, but are not often used in routine 
clinical practice. 
Beyond properties of individual products, two frameworks 
emphasize the socio-technical dimensions of innovation adoption. 
John Kotter’s “Eight Steps to Leading Change” includes social 
challenges such as forming a powerful guiding coalition, 
communicating a vision, empowering broad based action, and 
changing organizational culture by institutionalizing new 
approaches [28]. Trish Greenhalgh’s “Nonadoption, 
Abandonment, Scale-up, Spread, and Sustainability” (NASSS) 
framework consists of 6 domains other than the technology at 
hand, including the wider political and regulatory system and 
organizational characteristics such as leadership and readiness for 
change [22]. Both frameworks emphasize the role of human labor 
required to integrate rather than deploy machine learning 
technologies within complex organizations [34]. 
Although the frameworks described above provide a 
foundation of important insights into how healthcare innovations 
are adopted, machine learning technologies present a new set of 
challenges. New mechanisms of trust and accountability must be 
developed with both hospital leaders and front-line staff to 
incorporate this new type of prediction and information into 
clinical practice. In addition, regulatory frameworks for machine 
learning in healthcare are nascent, requiring substantial effort at 
the local level to build trust and accountability. 
 
 
 
3 CASE STUDY: SEPSIS WATCH 
In this case study, we begin by providing an overview of sepsis 
and the Sepsis Watch system, including phases of design, 
development, and workflow. In the second half of the case study, 
we articulate how we conceptualized Sepsis Watch as a socio-
technical system within a particular institutional context. We 
draw out the implications of this conceptualization by describing 
a set of strategies used to build trust and mechanisms of 
accountability around the tool. We end the case study with a 
discussion of the unanticipated ways in which Sepsis Watch was 
integrated into and justified within clinical decision-making.  
Described in further detail below, Sepsis Watch is a sepsis 
detection and management platform developed to support and 
improve patient outcomes through increased compliance with 
recommended treatment guidelines for sepsis. The technical 
components of Sepsis Watch include a deep learning model, web 
application, data pipeline and database, and custom web services 
to extract data in real-time. When a patient arrives and is admitted 
to the Emergency Department, her personal electronic health 
record (EHR) data is run through the Sepsis Watch system. If the 
model predicts that she is at high risk of developing sepsis, her 
patient information is represented by a “patient card” on the 
Sepsis Watch iPad application. A nurse, who is responsible for 
monitoring the devoted iPad on which Sepsis Watch runs, 
regularly checks the app to review patients at risk of developing 
sepsis. If a patient is predicted to be septic or at high risk, the nurse 
calls the Emergency Department physician responsible for the 
patient’s care, and conveys the risk category on the telephone. If 
the physician agrees the patient requires treatment for sepsis, the 
patient is further tracked on the iPad application by the nurse 
until the recommended treatment for sepsis is completed. This 
overview of the Sepsis Watch system represents only the most 
basic aspects of the system. Our case study fleshes out all the 
human components and technical infrastructure that were put in 
place to effectively integrate Sepsis Watch into clinical practice.  
This article represents an interdisciplinary effort to analyze 
and articulate the implementation of a deep learning tool into 
routine clinical healthcare, combining practitioner self-reflection 
with qualitative insights drawn from ethnographic interviews and 
observations. The case study draws on practitioner, clinician, and 
researcher experiences over the 2.5-year duration of the Sepsis 
Watch project. A detailed description of clinical implementation 
is provided elsewhere [53]. The Sepsis Watch team included 
nurses, physicians across multiple specialties, informaticians, 
statisticians, data engineers, solution architects and user interface 
designers. Advisors with expertise in clinical research and 
healthcare regulation were regularly consulted.  
An independently-funded anthropologist conducted 
participant observations and interviews to research the impact of 
Sepsis Watch on professional relationships, the work 
environment, and how humans interacted with the technology 
and collaborated to effectively use the technology. Over the 
course of the project development and implementation, twenty-
seven on-site interviews were conducted with representative 
                                                             
1 Quality assessments are posted publicly at www.medicare.gov/hospitalcompare. 
stakeholders, including clinicians, technologists, and 
administrators. In addition, on-site clinical practice was 
investigated during more than thirty hours of observation. Data 
analysis and coding was conducted using a grounded theory 
approach [57].  
3.1 SEPSIS 
Sepsis is an abnormal inflammatory response to infection and is 
the leading cause of inpatient mortality within hospitals in the 
United States [47]. In our local setting, about one in five patients 
admitted to the hospital develop sepsis and about one in ten 
patients who develop sepsis die during the inpatient stay [30]. 
While sepsis is universally recognized as a major health 
concern, there is no one standard way to diagnose sepsis. 
Different sepsis definitions identify different types of patients, 
and one expert review concluded that “it is an elusive task to 
generate a single all-encompassing definition” [3]. Most recently, 
unsupervised machine learning was utilized to identify four sepsis 
subgroups, resulting in a collection of disease definitions that are 
not transparent to even expert clinicians [55]. Similarly, when 
human sepsis experts from across the country were asked to 
review patient cases, raters often failed to agree on a sepsis 
diagnosis [16]. 
Amidst a lack of professional consensus surrounding sepsis 
diagnosis, there is close regulatory monitoring of sepsis 
treatment. In 2015, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) began requiring US hospitals to report compliance 
rates with a sepsis treatment protocol, known as SEP-1. CMS 
assesses the quality of healthcare provided at over 4,000 health 
systems in the United States and posts the assessments publicly.1 
In addition, every quarter, health systems manually comb through 
randomly selected charts to document compliance with the SEP-1 
sepsis treatment guidelines that have been documented to 
improve patient outcomes [46, 56]. While some health systems 
have improved performance and patient outcomes through 
quality improvement programs [1], other efforts to integrate 
technology to improve sepsis detection have failed [4, 14]. 
Treating sepsis according to evidence-based guidelines and 
improving patient outcomes remains elusive for most hospital 
systems. 
3.2 PROJECT BACKGROUND 
In 2016, a team of front-line physicians submitted a pilot proposal 
to work with a local innovation team to improve detection and 
treatment of sepsis. Proposals are primarily evaluated based on 
the importance of the problem and opportunity for improvement 
rather than the novelty of a technology solution; that is, a 
problem—not a technology—is the starting point of a project. 
Health system leaders approved the project for investment and 
implementation support.  
This was not the first time the health system attempted to 
improve its comparatively low sepsis detection and treatment 
performance. A prior effort caused front-line staff significant 
alarm fatigue and failed to improve patient outcomes [4]. 
 
 
Incorporating lessons from this prior implementation, a 
transdiciplinary team was assembled with the primary objective 
to improve early detection and treatment for sepsis, as defined by 
the CMS performance measure. 
A guiding principle during the period of defining the problem 
that Sepsis Watch was trying to solve was to “think beyond 
detection” in the words of one local physician. Clinicians felt that 
most sepsis treatment failures were due to failure to follow-up 
rather than failure to detect. Compliance with SEP-1 requires the 
successful execution of dozens of steps in the six hours following 
sepsis detection. The bulk of the Sepsis Watch functionality was 
designed to continuously monitor patient status and support the 
tracking of sepsis treatment items to ensure appropriate 
completion. Clinical stakeholders decided to focus the pilot on 
early sepsis detection within the emergency department (ED). 
Analysis of local data revealed that over 40% of sepsis cases 
emerged in the ED and the average time between admission to the 
hospital and sepsis was 2.01 hours [30]. Thus, the local context 
and the local expertise of clinicians shaped the problem definition 
at the outset of the project. 
The first twelve months of the project were dedicated to 
assembling the team around the problem, curating the data to 
better characterize the problem, and starting to design a workflow 
and technology solution. The second twelve months of the project 
were largely dedicated to developing and validating the ML 
model, web application, data pipeline, and integration platform 
which are collectively described as Sepsis Watch. The last six 
months of the project leading up to launch included technical 
integration into EHR to access real-time data and integration into 
clinical workflows. 
Development of the model and evaluation of Sepsis Watch in 
clinical practice was approved by the University Health System 
Institutional Review Board (Pro00093721, Pro00080914). The deep 
learning model was published and reported according to the 
Transparent Reporting of a Multivariable Prediction Model for 
Individual Prognosis or Diagnosis (TRIPOD) guidelines [11]. 
Clinical impact is being evaluated according to a pre-registered 
clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT03655626). 
3.3 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT 
3.3.1 Datasets. The first challenge was to curate local EHR data 
to better understand the problem and to build out the relevant 
data elements to train the machine learning model. Clinicians felt 
that a model developed using local data would outperform models 
developed elsewhere and prior research has demonstrated the 
poor generalizability of machine learning models in healthcare 
[42, 62, 63]. Data were curated from the local quarternary 
academic hospital with over 1,000 beds and over 40,000 inpatient 
admissions per year. In total, the model development and 
evaluation dataset contained over 32 million data points. 
3.3.2 Model. Machine learning experts explored methods that 
utilized a broad range of features, including medical history and 
all repeated vital sign and laboratory measurements. Sepsis is a 
complex condition that progresses rapidly and results in 
abnormalities across many data modalities. A model would need 
to generate accurate predictions starting at the beginning of a 
hospital encounter and rapidly update as new information became 
available. Model explainability was not prioritized, because 
regulations promote standardized treatment of sepsis, regardless 
of cause. As previously described, human experts often disagree 
about sepsis diagnoses and major medical and public health 
organizations publicly promote distinct disease definitions.  
The model generates risk scores every hour for every adult 
patient to detect sepsis [18, 19]. The model extended prior work 
using recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for clinical event 
detection by coupling a RNN [9, 33] with a multi-task gaussian 
processes (MGPs). Although there are emerging methods to 
improve explainability of RNNs, end users cannot contemplate the 
entire model and cannot reliably understand the relationships 
between model inputs and outputs [13, 32]. As such, there was not 
a deliberate effort to explain the MGP-RNN model output. 
3.3.2 Workflow. Clinical stakeholders proposed a workflow in 
which a specialized team of nurses, known as rapid response team 
(RRT) nurses, were the primary end users of Sepsis Watch. A prior 
implementation of clinical decision support to improve sepsis 
detection caused significant alarm fatigue for front-line 
clinicians—a pop-up fired over 100 times per day in the electronic 
health record (EHR) for certain high risk patients and 86% of 
notifications were canceled [4]. Based on this experience, the team 
prioritized minimizing alarm fatigue by having a nurse screen 
alerts and make a phone call. The RRT nurse would call front-line 
physicians to confirm sepsis diagnoses and there was a clear 
directive that the nurse could not independently diagnose or treat 
sepsis. Sepsis Watch is not a diagnostic device and was never 
intended to drive clinical care. Sepsis Watch identified patients for 
further evaluation and the attending physician caring for an 
individual patient made the final diagnostic determination to start 
treatment for sepsis. 
The Sepsis Watch workflow was designed to rapidly identify 
patients requiring treatment for sepsis. Risk scores are calculated 
every hour and patients with a high risk score above 60% are 
displayed in red. At this risk score threshold, the positive 
predictive value of the model was 20%. Sepsis criteria are 
evaluated every five minutes and patients who meet sepsis criteria 
are displayed in black. Patients meeting sepsis criteria and high 
risk patients are displayed at the top of the Triage page. The RRT 
nurse is instructed to call the ED attending physician to discuss 
every high risk or septic patient. If the attending physician 
confirms that the patient does not require treatment for sepsis, the 
patient is moved to the Screened page. If the attending physician 
confirms that the patient does require treatment for sepsis, the 
patient is moved to the Treatment page. Patients are only moved 
to the Screened or Treatment pages after a telephone conversation 
between the RRT nurse and ED attending physician. 
3.4 IMPLEMENTATION 
3.4.1 Cultivating Trust and Accountability to Integrate a Socio-
Technical System.  Early on, our team recognized the need to 
integrate Sepsis Watch into existing social and professional 
contexts within the local healthcare delivery organization. Prior 
literature would suggest that model explainability and 
interpretability are central to cultivating trust, the belief held by 
 
 
 
an individual that the system is appropriate and accurate, and 
accountability, the ways in which technologists and designers can 
be held responsible for the performance of a system, in the context 
of a machine learning technology [24, 49]. In this section, we 
highlight actual strategies employed by the Sepsis Watch team to 
successfully cultivate trust and accountability across stakeholder 
groups that did not involve model interpretability. We first 
describe how trust and accountability were cultivated in the team 
of individuals assembled around Sepsis Watch and then in the 
approaches to design and develop the technology. We then 
discuss how Sepsis Watch became trustworthy and accountable at 
scale and how information technology leaders, hospital leaders, 
and front-line staff were highly engaged in the design, 
development, and integration of Sepsis Watch into clinical care. 
In investigating mechanisms of accountability, our focus is not on 
individual clinicians, but rather on those who designed and 
managed the implementation of the tool. While there is a strong 
history and legal precedent for holding individual clinicians 
accountable for clinical decisions, there is also increasing 
recognition that health systems must promote safety at a system 
level to support the practice of individual clinicians [27]. 
3.4.2 Team Members Embedded in Existing Social and 
Professional Networks. The team assembled to design, develop, and 
integrate Sepsis Watch into routine clinical practice included a 
full-time innovation team, as well as implementation experts, 
machine learning experts, and clinical experts. All members 
brought years of experience solving local problems across clinical 
silos during which they built networks and professional 
credibility that were crucial to the success of the project. For 
several years leading up to the Sepsis Watch launch, the clinical 
lead reviewed sepsis cases for CMS and met with clinical 
stakeholders throughout the hospital to discuss sepsis treatment 
failures. The machine learning experts had prior experience 
developing machine learning models for clinical applications. 
3.4.3 Communicating Trustworthiness. In this section, we 
describe four specific approaches through which the Sepsis Watch 
team cultivated trust and accountability in the design and 
development process. Sometimes this involved quantifying model 
performance, and sometimes this involved qualitatively 
communicating patient stories or providing direct experience of 
the tool. Different stakeholders often valued different forms of 
evidence and modes of communication [15]. 
The first approach was to focus on demonstrating progress 
solving a problem important to local stakeholders, rather than 
demonstrating progress building a novel technology. Local data 
was carefully curated and the solution needed to work effectively 
in the local context. To cultivate trust and accountability in how 
well the technology worked, the sepsis definition and model were 
peer-reviewed and disseminated in both clinical and technical 
venues [18, 19, 30]. The MGP-RNN framework was directly 
compared to both clinical scores and machine learning methods 
utilized to predict sepsis at other institutions. In retrospective 
local data, MGP-RNN consistently detected more sepsis events 
early than any other method. 
The second approach was to communicate the utility of the 
innovation in ways that were meaningful to various stakeholders. 
Aggregate model performance measures included the number of 
high risk alerts per hour and the number of sepsis cases detected 
daily by MGP-RNN compared to other methods. Individual patient 
cases were also visualized to show how MGP-RNN often detected 
sepsis hours before the clinical diagnosis. Relevant patient cases 
featuring successes and failures were presented during clinical 
and faculty meetings to reinforce clinical experiences. A one-page 
“Model Facts” sheet shown in Figure 1 was designed with clinical 
professionals to transparently report relevant information to 
front-line staff. The design builds upon “Model Cards for Model 
Reporting” [36] and incorporates concepts from pharmaceutical 
drug labels. 
 
Figure 1: A “Model Facts” sheet designed to convey relevant 
information about the Sepsis Watch model to clinical end 
users. The sections of the sheet draw inspiration from 
pharmaceutical drug labels. 
The third approach was to establish mechanisms of public and 
external accountability. A clinical trial was pre-registered with 
specified primary and secondary outcomes. During this process, 
the clinical team set target goals for improvement and had candid 
conversations about turning off the system if improvements were 
not achieved. To maintain accountability, an external data safety 
 
 
monitoring board including top clinical researchers and the chief 
nursing officer was assembled to oversee the safety and efficacy 
of Sepsis Watch. 
Finally, the fourth approach was to engage front-line clinicians 
directly in the design and development of the model and user 
interface. Clinical experts specified and reviewed representations 
of all data elements used by the model. Once the final model was 
developed, multiple iterations of chart reviews were completed to 
finalize the threshold used to classify high risk patients. Two RRT 
nurses reviewed multiple versions of the user interface and 
clinical experts reviewed and confirmed patient records 
retrospectively identified as high risk of sepsis and meeting sepsis 
criteria. Clinicians specified the most relevant information to 
accompany the risk level displayed on the Sepsis Watch user 
interface. This information could provide immediate insight into 
patient status, but needed to be contextualized and synthesized 
with other information. 
      While engaging front-line clinicians, two established 
practices described above were utilized to promote trust: the 
ability to test the innovation and the ability to watch others try 
the innovation first [5]. The first four users given access to Sepsis 
Watch during the three-month silent period preceding launch 
were clinical experts who helped design the system. These 
clinicians engaged directly with the system early on to develop 
intuition, provide feedback, and build experience that enhanced 
their ability to train others in the future. 
3.4.4 Trust and Accountability at Scale – Becoming an Enterprise 
Solution. To impact patient care, Sepsis Watch needed to integrate 
with an EHR system purchased for $700 million that supported 
nearly all aspects of clinical care. It was critical that the Sepsis 
Watch team partner with the information technology team to 
enable this integration. 
      First, the team had to work within the network of 
established technology supplier relationships. Most clinical 
decision support is built within the EHR and building a solution 
outside the EHR requires significant development and integration 
effort. The Sepsis Watch team joined the health information 
technology team and EHR vendor on weekly phone calls for six 
months to identify an optimal path towards technical integration. 
Together with the EHR vendor, there was consensus that the 
computational requirements of the Sepsis Watch model were 
beyond the capabilities of the EHR. The health system invested in 
building interfaces to provide Sepsis Watch real-time EHR data. 
At this point, the innovation team had to establish itself as a 
supplier of enterprise technology to the health system. 
Established processes, such as load testing and security reviews, 
were completed in the months preceding Sepsis Watch launch. 
Although the innovation team typically transitioned pilot projects 
to operational stakeholders after 12 months, the team continued 
to monitor and maintain the Sepsis Watch model and web 
application. There was agreement that “we built it, we own it”. 
During the 6-month pilot, the Sepsis Watch team was responsive 
to technical issues, delivering system uptime of 99.34% with one 
instance of planned patching, two instances of the web application 
being temporarily unavailable, and one instance of data not being 
updated. There is also broad recognition that in healthcare 
concept drift and data drift can change machine learning model 
behavior and models have to be closely monitored to ensure 
reliability [12, 40, 50]. Ultimately, the innovation team set up a 55-
inch monitor in the office to display the current state of the 
application and model risk scores, displayed in Figure 2. Clear 
lines of accountability were required between organizational 
stakeholders. 
 
Figure 2: A 55’ monitor on a desk at the office of the 
innovation team. The left hand side displays the live Sepsis 
Watch app and the right hand side displays aggregate 
measures of model output. 
3.4.5 Building Accountable Relationships with Hospital 
Leadership. The two preceding sections describe how trust and 
accountability were cultivated to develop and then integrate 
Sepsis Watch at scale. This trust and accountability was channeled 
to develop partnerships required for the pilot. For example, when 
it became clear that the initial focus of the pilot was the ED, team 
members met with the appropriate leaders to form an 
implementation partnership. Two ED physicians and the ED 
nursing director joined the Sepsis Watch team and were closely 
engaged in workflow and design decisions leading up to the 
launch. To formalize the RRT nursing workflow, multiple team 
members met with the Chief Nursing Officer resulting in a 
subsequent meeting involving nursing leadership from across the 
hospital. That meeting initiated a month of close collaboration 
with multiple nursing stakeholders to develop training material, 
finalize workflow decisions, and better understand staffing 
requirements. 
To maintain leadership engagement throughout the pilot, a 
governance committee was established including leadership from 
ED nursing, ED physicians, hospital medicine, information 
technology, and innovation. Monthly meetings were held 
throughout the pilot to review progress, address concerns 
surfaced by front-line staff, and make decisions about changes to 
workflow. 
3.4.6 Trust and Accountability on the Front Lines of Healthcare. 
Significant effort was invested to build trust and accountability 
with RRT nurses, the primary end users of Sepsis Watch. Two 
nurses were involved in the design and development of the system 
and provided feedback on training materials developed for the 
pilot. During the first two weeks of the Sepsis Watch pilot, 
 
 
 
innovation team staff conducted one-on-one training sessions in 
the hospital to support RRT nurses during shifts. Sepsis Watch 
was rolled out to a small group of RRT nurses and formal and 
informal lines of communication were established between the 
nurses, clinical experts, and innovation team staff. After a month, 
feedback from this small group of RRT nurses was presented to 
the governance committee and prompted a handful of workflow 
changes. 
To reach ED attending physicians, the Sepsis Watch team 
presented at multiple faculty meetings. ED physicians did not 
directly see the Sepsis Watch interface, so communication focused 
on the role of the RRT nurse and the incoming phone calls 
inquiring about treatment for sepsis. There was a lack of 
awareness during the first few weeks of the pilot and additional 
communication and messaging was promoted by both the ED 
medical and nursing directors. 
Throughout the design and development of Sepsis Watch, RRT 
nurses and ED physicians were valued and involved as expert 
clinical professionals. Sepsis Watch was meant to support 
clinicians by ensuring that nothing slipped through the cracks. 
The ways in which professional expertise shaped the impact of 
Sepsis Watch are discussed in the next section. 
3.5 INTEGRATION: UNEXPECTED 
INTERACTIONS THAT FACILITATED USE 
Despite Sepsis Watch being a technical tool, its purpose was to 
prompt human interactions around patient care and to improve 
clinical decision-making. For this reason, understanding, 
analyzing, and improving the interactions and work practices 
around the tool were a central part of this project.  
Based on observations of clinical practice and analyses of 
usage patterns by clinicians over time, we found that while early 
in the pilot the model may have been given too much credence, 
clinical professionals re-calibrated over time. Moreover, we 
learned that RRT nurses developed expertise and practices over 
time that contextualized the information displayed in Sepsis 
Watch, and facilitated the integration of the tool into existing 
clinical practice. These practices ranged from emotional labor 
around communication with physicians to drawing on their own 
clinical expertise. For instance, RRT nurses developed a practice 
of working outside of the app and opening a patient’s EHR chart 
before calling the ED physician. By reading through a patient’s 
chart, the RRT nurse was preparing to present the full clinical 
picture and do “due diligence,” in the words of one interviewee, 
in anticipation of questions received from physicians. This was 
not a step articulated by the design team prior to implementation, 
but rather developed as an ad hoc practice that facilitated effective 
integration.  
 Taken together, these observations demonstrate two 
important findings. First, RRT nurses and ED physicians retained 
professional discretion to diagnose sepsis. Second, respecting the 
boundaries of professional practice allowed new sets of expertise 
to emerge and in fact enhanced the use of the machine learning-
driven tool. 
4 BEYOND INTERPRETABILITY: 
ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES TO BUILT 
TRUST AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
With reference to algorithmic fairness, accountability, and 
transparency, the term “black box” is often used with a negative 
connotation. A black box is presented as an opaque barrier that 
inhibits accountability [7]. However, in the healthcare context, 
the urge to transcend the black box is confounded by the fact that 
in some cases “the human body is a black box,” in the words of a 
Sepsis Watch team member. The pre-eminent focus on machine 
learning model explainability or interpretability as a means to 
provide transparency and accountability in healthcare should be 
interrogated. First, front-line clinicians may not want to be 
oriented towards technology and away from patients. Second, the 
current practice of professional clinicians often includes the 
utilization of information that isn’t comprehensively understood. 
Third, causal relationships are not always necessary for 
application in clinical decision making. Finally, as scholars have 
begun to point out, explainability or interpretability is poorly 
defined and cannot be an end in and of itself without further 
specification [26, 51].       
What can or should constitute opening the “black box” in the 
context of clinical practice when the causes and mechanisms of 
illness, especially in the case of sepsis, are poorly understood? The 
response should not be to abandon the normative values driving 
the field toward interpretable and explainable AI, but rather 
should be to re-examine how those values might be achieved by 
other means.  
In the previous section, we presented the mechanisms through 
which trust and accountability were built into the design, 
development, and implementation of Sepsis Watch. In this 
section, we draw out four key values and practices that should be 
considered when developing machine learning to support clinical 
decision-making: define the problem in context, build 
relationships with stakeholders, respect professional discretion, 
and create ongoing feedback loops with stakeholders. 
4.1 PROBLEM DEFINITION: FROM END USER 
TO DATA SCIENTIST 
As Passi and Barocas have argued, “some of the most important 
normative implications of data science systems have their roots in 
the work of problem formulation” [43]. That is, how, why, and in 
what context data science problems are formulated as problems to 
be solved is neither value-neutral nor self-obvious [39]. From this 
perspective, it is significant that Sepsis Watch was developed to 
meet a specific problem in a specific hospital as defined by 
frontline clinicians working in that hospital. This was achieved 
not only through the project selection priorities and processes, 
which were put in place to closely align clinical problems and new 
innovations, but also through the experiences of the team 
working on the problem. The team members had each been 
involved in prior attempts, some successful and some not, to 
implement new technologies at the local health system. 
Moreover, the Sepsis Watch model was developed with 
clinicians from the beginning and on local patient data. Clinicians 
 
 
were involved in selecting the cohort parameters for the 
population the model was trained on, the data elements included 
in the model training process, and the design of the model 
evaluation. 
4.1.1 Existing Institutional Processes Matter. Creating a model 
to improve treatment without taking into account existing care 
and treatment processes is likely to create not only inaccurate but 
also harmful health interventions [8]. This underscores the 
importance of working with front-line clinicians to understand 
relevant aspects of the care delivery process that must be included 
in the model as features, which Sepsis Watch did from the start. 
In addition, information about the indicated and contra-
indicated use of the model must be clearly articulated to end users 
to ensure that the strengths and weaknesses of a given model are 
clearly understood. The “Model Fact” sheet was designed and 
developed with front-line clinicians to distill relevant information 
about the use of the sepsis model. 
4.2 RELATIONSHIP BUILDING: ENGAGE 
EARLY AND OFTEN 
The multi-stakeholder development process was driven by the 
belief that trust in a technology is rooted  in relationships—not in 
a technical specification or feature. Each phase of development 
included substantive engagement with relevant stakeholders. For 
instance, in the early phases of building and tuning the model, 
lead clinicians met regularly with the development team to review 
and validate the model. In the later phases involving front-line 
integration of the tool, the development team held regular 
meetings with stakeholders, from the information technology 
support team responsible for managing and securing EHR data to 
hospital management responsible for resource allocation and 
institutional support, to the nurses responsible for using and 
integrating the tool into clinical practice. 
4.2.1 Allocate Human Resources. Defining the problem and 
clearly articulating how and why a technical tool addresses that 
problem has implications for processes around tool planning and 
development, as well as end-user education. The development of 
professional education materials around the tool’s 
implementation was a resource-intensive aspect of the tool 
integration. In a formal acknowledgement of the work and 
resources required to integrate a tool into clinical practice, a new 
devoted full-time role was created to work with frontline 
clinicians and stakeholders. This role worked closely not only 
with the nursing staff responsible for using Sepsis Watch, but also 
acted as the liaison with the numerous hospital departments 
implicated in new clinical workflows, from nursing leadership to 
professional education modules. 
4.3 RESPECT PROFESSIONAL DISCRETION: 
AUGMENT, DON’T REPLACE 
The tool, from its inception, was designed to be a software 
diagnostic aide, not a standalone diagnostic device. This approach 
retained deference to human expertise to make final diagnostic 
decisions. The implications of relying on technology to inform 
decision making and diagnosis are complex. In this case, the tool 
was indeed designed as “an algorithm in the loop” [21]. However, 
there remain open research questions beyond the scope of this 
study around the implications for professional skill, training, and 
certification. While the model was not designed to improve 
human understanding of sepsis diagnosis, other mechanisms were 
in place to improve how clinicians within the ED diagnose sepsis. 
For example, individual patient cases of sepsis diagnosis and 
treatment failure were discussed at every monthly governance 
committee meeting. These reviews continue to be central to 
distilling and disseminating learnings to ED physicians. Machine 
learning systems need to be supplemented with other approaches 
to improve human understanding and decision making. 
4.3.1 Elevate New Expertise. The RRT nurses were integral to 
the effective integration of Sepsis Watch, as described above. They 
also became experts at remotely evaluating sepsis. While nurses 
traditionally assess patients in person, the Sepsis Watch RRT 
nurses developed significant expertise contextualizing and 
synthesizing digital patient data. These nurses expanded their 
professional expertise in order to bridge the gap between digital 
data gathering, contextualizing, and synthesizing, and clinical 
decision making. 
4.4 STAKEHOLDER FEEDBACK LOOPS: 
BETWEEN DESIGNERS AND USERS 
The multi-stakeholder development process was designed to 
facilitate sustained, multi-directional communication. As much as 
meetings and information sessions were held to convey 
information to users and stakeholders, they were used equally as 
a site to receive information and to hold space for issue-flagging 
and discussion. For example, a second version of the user interface 
was launched two months into the pilot based on feedback 
received during sessions. Additionally, new kinds of feedback 
loops were established, such as the governance committee, to 
manage and oversee new issues as they arose.  
In addition, Sepsis Watch developers also instantiated 
mechanisms to enact their commitment to ongoing monitoring of 
the tool in use. The tool development team embraced the 
mentality that, in the words of one Sepsis Watch team member, 
“You build it, you own it”. The visual presence of Sepsis Watch in 
the office, with a monitor displaying the model’s behavior, kept 
the tool from fading into the background even though they were 
no longer actively working on its development. 
4.3.1 Between Designers and Patient Proxies. Although the focus 
of this paper has been on the clinicians impacted by Sepsis Watch, 
the tool was developed to improve patient outcomes and patients 
should not be overlooked as stakeholders in the overall system. 
There were several key ways in which the interests of the patients 
were represented. First, Sepsis Watch underwent an ethical 
research review process through the health system IRB, a process 
designed to protect ensure the safety of patient subjects. Second, 
Sepsis Watch was designed to be an overlay on top of existing 
clinical care routines, and it is within these routines that ED 
clinicians cultivate trust and accountability with patients. For 
applications of machine learning in healthcare that more directly 
interface with patients, additional considerations are required to 
 
 
 
cultivate trust and build mechanisms of accountability with 
patients. 
5 CONCLUSION 
Our presentation and discussion of the Sepsis Watch tool 
highlights a set of challenges and potential opportunities facing 
the actual, situated use of machine learning technologies in 
healthcare. These challenges include how to ethically build 
models, interpret and explain model output, recognize and 
account for biases, and minimize disruptions to professional 
expertise and work cultures. Our work underscores the necessity 
to conceptualize a machine learning implementation as a socio-
technical system, composed of both social and technical aspects 
operating in a specific institutional context. This 
conceptualization is necessary in order to productively navigate 
the complex ethical dimensions of machine learning-driven 
healthcare. 
At the outset, the goal of the Sepsis Watch tool was to improve 
patient care and to enhance professional expertise and decision-
making. Given the lack of consensus around the clinical definition 
of sepsis—the ground truth the model was optimized to predict—
and the potential performance benefits of a deep learning model, 
the team developed other mechanisms besides model 
interpretability to build trust and accountability in the tool’s 
design, development, implementation, and maintenance. In our 
presentation of the tool, we described some of these processes and 
strategies, and also discussed some of the ways in which our 
planning did not account for the complexities of integrating and 
justifying the output of the model into clinical decision-making. 
We found that although model outputs do not need to be 
explainable, clinical decisions do require explanations and 
justifications and there is significant labor required to map 
between model outputs and clinical decisions. From this 
discussion, we drew out four key values and practices that 
characterized our approach to support clinical decision-making 
with a deep learning tool: rigorously define the problem in 
context, build relationships with stakeholders, respect 
professional discretion, and create ongoing feedback loops with 
stakeholders. 
Our work has significant implications for future research 
regarding mechanisms of institutional accountability and 
considerations for designing machine learning systems. Our work 
highlights the significant investment of resources and effort to 
both integrate machine learning technologies and build human 
capacity and expertise to effectively use machine learning 
technologies in healthcare. Furthermore, for machine learning 
solutions to operate at enterprise scale, mechanisms of trust and 
accountability must be pursued at multiple levels within an 
organization. Our work underscores the limits of model 
interpretability as a solution to ensure transparency, accuracy, 
and accountability in practice. Instead, by conceptualizing Sepsis 
Watch as a socio-technical system in an institutional context, our 
work demonstrates other means and goals to achieve FATML 
values in design and in practice. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We wish to thank our anonymous reviewers for their insightful 
comments and Dina Sarro, Liz Alderton, Sahil Sandhu, and 
Elizabeth Watkins for their ongoing engagement and feedback. 
Our team would like to thank Drs. Thomas Owens, William 
Fulkerson, Mary Klotman, Jeffrey Ferranti, Allan Kirk, Robert 
Califf, and Mary Ann Fuchs for operational and leadership 
support throughout the development of Sepsis Watch. We would 
like to thank Drs. Jason Theiling, Rebecca Donahoe, Charles 
Gerardo, and Allan Kirk for enthusiastically supporting the initial 
Sepsis Watch integration in the adult emergency department. 
Finally, we would like to thank Kevin Anstrom, Dan Mark, and 
Mary Ann Fuchs for advising on the Sepsis Watch clinical study. 
The development, validation, and integration of Sepsis Watch was 
fully funded by Duke Health, with significant contribution by the 
Duke Institute for Health Innovation and Duke Health 
Technology Solutions. Data & Society’s qualitative evaluation was 
supported by funding from Luminate, the John D. and Catherine 
T. MacArthur Foundation, and the Ethics and Governance of AI 
Fund. Funders were not involved in the preparation, review, or 
submission of the manuscript. 

REFERENCES
[1] Afshar, M., Arain, E., Ye, C., Gilbert, E., Xie, M., Lee, J., Churpek, M.M., Durazo-
Arvizu, R., Markossian, T. and Joyce, C. 2019. Patient Outcomes and Cost-
Effectiveness of a Sepsis Care Quality Improvement Program in a Health 
System. Journal of the American Medical Association. (Jul. 2019). 
[2] Ahmad, M.A., Eckert, C., Teredesia, A. and McKelvey, G. 2018. Interpretable 
Machine Learning in Healthcare. IEEE Intelligent Informatice Bulletin. 19, (Aug. 
2018), 1–7. 
[3] Angus, D.C., Seymour, C.W., Coopersmith, C.M., Deutschman, C.S., Klompas, 
M., Levy, M.M., Martin, G.S., Osborn, T.M., Rhee, C. and Watson, R.S. 2016. A 
Framework for the Development and Interpretation of Different Sepsis 
Definitions and Clinical Criteria. Journal of the American Medical Association. 
44, 3 (Mar. 2016), e113–e121. 
[4] Bedoya, A.D., Clement, M.E., Phelan, M., Steorts, R.C., OBrien, C. and Goldstein, 
B.A. 2019. Minimal Impact of Implemented Early Warning Score and Best 
Practice Alert for Patient Deterioration. Critical Care Medicine. 47, 1 (Jan. 2019), 
49–55. 
[5] Berwick, D.M. 2003. Disseminating innovations in health care. JAMA. 289, 15 
(Apr. 2003), 1969–1975. 
[6] boyd, D. and Crawford, K. 2012. Critical Questions for Big Data. Information, 
Ccommunication, and Society. 5 (May 2012), 662–679. 
[7] Burrell, J. 2016. How the machine “thinks”: Understanding opacity in machine 
learning algorithms. Big Data & Society. 3, 1 (Feb. 2016), 205395171562251–12. 
[8] Caruana, R., Lou, Y., Gehrke, J., Koch, P., Sturm, M. and Elhadad, N. 2015. 
Intelligible Models for HealthCare: Predicting Pneumonia Risk and Hospital 30-
day Readmission. KDD. (New York, New York, USA, 2015), 1721–1730. 
[9] Choi, E., Schuetz, A., Stewart, W.F. and Sun, J. 2016. Using recurrent neural 
network models for early detection of heart failure onset. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. 61, 4 (Aug. 2016), ocw112–10. 
[10] Citron, D.K. and Pasquale, F. 2014. The Scored Society: Due Proccess for 
Automated Predictions. Washington Law Review. (Mar. 2014). 
[11] Collins, G.S., Reitsma, J.B., Altman, D.G. and Moons, K.G.M. 2015. Transparent 
Reporting of a multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis Or 
Diagnosis (TRIPOD): The TRIPOD Statement. Annals of Internal Medicine. 162, 
1 (Jan. 2015), 55–11. 
[12] Davis, S.E., Lasko, T.A., Chen, G., Siew, E.D. and Matheny, M.E. 2017. 
Calibration drift in regression and machine learning models for acute kidney 
injury. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 24, 6 (Mar. 
2017), 1052–1061. 
[13] Doshi-Valez, F. and Kim, B. 2017. Towards a Rigorous Science of Interpretable 
Machine Learning. (Mar. 2017), 1–13. 
[14] Downing, N.L., Rolnick, J., Poole, S.F., Hall, E., Wessels, A.J., Heidenreich, P. and 
Shieh, L. 2019. Electronic health record-based clinical decision support alert for 
severe sepsis: a randomised evaluation. BMJ Quality & Safety. (Mar. 2019), 
bmjqs–2018–008765–7. 
[15] Elish, M.C. 2018. The Stakes of Uncertainty: Developing and Integrating 
Machine Learning in Clinical Care. EPIC Proceedings. (Nov. 2018). 
[16] Evans, L. 2019. A Closer Look at Sepsis-Associated Mortality. JAMA Network 
Open. 2, 2 (Feb. 2019), e187565. 
 
 
[17] Ferryman, K. and Pitcan, M. 2018. Fairness in precision medicine. Data & Society. 
2018. Data & Society. 
[18] Futoma, J., Hariharan, S. and Heller, K. 2017. Learning to Detect Sepsis with a 
Multitask Gaussian Process RNN Classifier. International Conference on Machine 
Learning. (Jun. 2017), 1–9. 
[19] Futoma, J., Hariharan, S., Heller, K., Sendak, M.P., Brajer, N., Clement, M., 
Bedoya, A. and OBrien, C. 2017. An Improved Multi-Output Gaussian Process 
RNN with Real-Time Validation for Early Sepsis Detection. Proceedings of 
Machine Learning for Healthcare. (Aug. 2017). 
[20] Gawande, A. 2010. The Velluvial Matrix. The New Yorker. (Jan. 2010). 
[21] Green, B. and Chen, Y. 2019. Disparate Interactions. (New York, New York, USA, 
2019), 90–99. 
[22] Greenhalgh, T., Wherton, J., Papoutsi, C., Lynch, J., Hughes, G., A'Court, C., 
Hinder, S., Fahy, N., Procter, R. and Shaw, S. 2017. Beyond Adoption: A New 
Framework for Theorizing and Evaluating Nonadoption, Abandonment, and 
Challenges to the Scale-Up, Spread, and Sustainability of Health and Care 
Technologies. Journal of Medical Internet Research. 19, 11 (Nov. 2017), e367. 
[23] Haupt, C.E. 2019. Artificial Professional Advice. Yale Journal of Law Technology. 
(Jun. 2019). 
[24] He, J., Baxter, S.L., Xu, J., Xu, J., Zhou, X. and Zhang, K. 2019. The practical 
implementation of artificial intelligence technologies in medicine. Nature 
medicine. 25, 1 (Jan. 2019), 30–36. 
[25] Holden, R.J. and Karsh, B.-T. 2010. The Technology Acceptance Model: Its past 
and its future in health care. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 43, 1 (Feb. 2010), 
159–172. 
[26] Kluttz, D.N., Kohli, N. and Mulligan, D.K. 2020. Shaping Our Tools: 
Contestability as a Means to Promote Responsible Algorithmic Decision 
Making in the Professions, in After the Dihital Tornado: Networks, Algorithms, 
Humanity. Combridge University Press. (2020). 
[27] Kohn, L.T., Corrihan, J.M., Donaldson, M.S.eds 1999. To Err is Human: Building 
a Safer Health System. National Academy Press, Institute of Medicine. (1999). 
[28] Kotter, J.P. 1995. Leading Change: Why Transformation Efforts Fail. Harvard 
business review. (Mar. 1995), 59–67. 
[29] Kroll, J.A., Huey, J., Barocas, S., Felten, E.W., Reidenberg, J.R., Robinson, D.G. 
and Yu, H. 2017. Accountable algorithms. University of Pennsylvania Law 
Review. 165, 3 (2017), 633–705. 
[30] Lin, A.L., Sendak, M.P., Bedoya, A.D., Clement, M.E., Futoma, J., Nichols, M., 
Gao, M., Heller, K. and OBrien, C. 2018. What Is Sepsis: Investigating the 
Heterogeneity of Patient Populations Captured by Different Sepsis Definitions. 
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine. (May 2018). 
[31] Lipton, Z.C. 2017. The Doctor Just Won't Accept That.  Interpretable ML 
Symposium NeurIPS 2017. (Nov. 2017). 
[32] Lipton, Z.C. 2016. The Mythos of Model Interpretability. ICML Workshop on 
Human Interpretability. (2016). 
[33] Lipton, Z.C., Kale, D.C. and Wetzel, R. 2016. Modeling missing data in clinical 
time series with rnns. Proceedings of Machine Learning for Healthcare. (2016). 
[34] Mateescu, A. and Elish, M.C. 2019. AI in Context: The Labor of Integrating New 
Technologies. Data & Society. (Jan. 2019), 1–54. 
[35] Miller, Tim 2017. Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social 
sciences. 267, (Jun. 2017), 1–38. 
[36] Mitchell, M., Wu, S., Zaldivar, A., Barnes, P., Vasserman, L., Hutchinson, B., 
Spitzer, E., Raji, I.D. and Gebru, T. 2019. Model Cards for Model Reporting. 
Proceedings of ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 
(FAT* 2019). (New York, New York, USA, 2019), 220–229. 
[37] Mittelstadt, B., Russell, C. and Wachter, S. 2019. Explaining Explanations in AI. 
Proceedings of ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 
(FAT* 2019). (New York, New York, USA, 2019), 279–288. 
[38] Need medical help? Sorry, not until you sign away your privacy: 2018. 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/612282/need-medical-help-sorry-not-until-
you-sign-away-your-privacy/. Accessed: 2019-08-23. 
[39] Neff, G., Tanweer, A., Fiore-Gartland, B. and Osburn, L. 2017. Critique and 
Contribute: A Practice-Based Framework for Improving Critical Data Studies 
and Data Science. Big data. 5, 2 (Jun. 2017), 85–97. 
[40] Nestor, B., McDermott, M.B., Chauhau, G., Naumann, T., Hughes, M.C., 
Goldenberg, A. and Ghassemi, M. 2018. Rethinking Clinical Prediction: Why 
Machine learning Must Consider Year of Care and Feature Aggregation. 
Machine Learning for Health MLH Workshop at NeurIPS. (Nov. 2018). 
[41] Obermeyer, Z., Powers, B., Vogeli, C. and Mullainathan, S. 2019. Dissecting 
racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations. Science. 
366, 6464 (Oct. 2019), 447–453. 
[42] Oh, J., Makar, M., Fusco, C., McCaffrey, R., Rao, K., Ryan, E.E., Washer, L., West, 
L.R., Young, V.B., Guttag, J., Hooper, D.C., Shenoy, E.S. and Wiens, J. 2018. A 
Generalizable, Data-Driven Approach to Predict Daily Risk of Clostridium 
difficile Infection at Two Large Academic Health Centers. Infection Control & 
Hospital Epidemiology. 39, 04 (Mar. 2018), 425–433. 
[43] Passi, S. and Barocas, S. 2019. Problem Formulation and Fairness. Proceedings of 
ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* 2019). 
(New York, New York, USA, 2019), 39–48. 
[44] Price, W.N. 2017. Regulating Black-Box Medicine. Michigan law review. 116, 3 
(2017), 421–474. 
[45] Rajkomar, A., Dean, J. and Kohane, I. 2019. Machine Learning in Medicine. New 
England Journal of Medicine. 380, 14 (Apr. 2019), 1347–1358. 
[46] Rhee, C. et al. 2018. Compliance With the National SEP-1 Quality Measure and 
Association With Sepsis Outcomes. Journal of the American Medical Association. 
46, 10 (Oct. 2018), 1585–1591. 
[47] Rhee, C. et al. 2017. Incidence and Trends of Sepsis in US Hospitals Using 
Clinical vs Claims Data, 2009-2014. JAMA. 318, 13 (Oct. 2017), 1241–1249. 
[48] Rogers, E.M. 1995. Diffusion of Innovations. The Free Press. 
[49] Rudin, C. 2019. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high 
stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine 
Intelligence. (May 2019), 206–215. 
[50] Saria, S. and Subbaswamy, A. 2019. Tutorial: Safe and Reliable Machine 
Learning. ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. (Apr. 
2019), 1–4. 
[51] Selbst, A.D. and Barocas, S. 2018. The intuitive appeal of explainable machines. 
Fordham Law Review. (2018), 1085–1139. 
[52] Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence 2019. The National Artificial 
Intelligence Research and Development Strategic Plan: 2019 Update. National 
Science Technology Council. (Jun. 2019). 
[53] Sendak, M.P. et al. 2019. Sepsis Watch: A Real-World Integration of Deep 
Learning into Routine Clinical Care. JMIR Preprints. (Jun. 2019). 
[54] Sendak, M.P., Gao, M., Nichols, M., Lin, A. and Balu, S. 2019. Machine Learning 
in Health Care: A Critical Appraisal of Challenges and Opportunities. eGEMs 
Generating Evidence and Methods to Improve Patient Outcomes. 7, 1 (Jan. 2019), 
1–4. 
[55] Seymour, C.W. et al. 2019. Derivation, Validation, and Potential Treatment 
Implications of Novel Clinical Phenotypes for Sepsis. JAMA. (May 2019), 1–15. 
[56] Seymour, C.W., Gesten, F., Prescott, H.C., Friedrich, M.E., Iwashyna, T.J., 
Phillips, G.S., Lemeshow, S., Osborn, T., Terry, K.M. and Levy, M.M. 2017. Time 
to Treatment and Mortality during Mandated Emergency Care for Sepsis. New 
England Journal of Medicine. (May 2017), NEJMoa1703058–10. 
[57] Strauss, A.L. and Corbin, J.M. 1997. Grounded Theory in Practice. Sage. 
[58] Topol, E.J. 2019. Deep Medicine (p. 18). Basic Books. March 2019. 
[59] Topol, E.J. 2019. High-performance medicine: the convergence of human and 
artificial intelligence. Nature medicine. 25, 1 (Jan. 2019), 44–56. 
[60] Verghese, A., Shah, N.H. and Harrington, R.A. 2018. What This Computer Needs 
Is a Physician: Humanism and Artificial Intelligence. JAMA. 319, 1 (Jan. 2018), 
19–20. 
[61] Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B. and Floridi, L. 2017. Why a right to explanation of 
automated decision-making does not exist in the general data protection 
regulation. International Data Privacy Law. 7, (2017). 
[62] Wiens, J., Guttag, J. and Horvitz, E. 2014. A study in transfer learning: 
leveraging data from multiple hospitals to enhance hospital-specific 
predictions. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 21, 4 (Jul. 
2014), 699–706. 
[63] Zech, J.R., Badgeley, M.A., Liu, M., Costa, A.B., Titano, J.J. and Oermann, E.K. 
2018. Variable generalization performance of a deep learning model to detect 
pneumonia in chest radiographs: A cross-sectional study. PLoS Medicine. 15, 11 
(Nov. 2018), e1002683–17. 
 
