Onward for the freedom of others Marching beyond the AI Ethics
Petros Terzis† 
 Centre for Information Rights 
 University of Winchester 
 Winchester, UK 
 petros.terzis@winchester.ac.uk 
 
ABSTRACT 
The debate on the ethics of Artificial Intelligence brought 
together different stakeholders including but not limited to 
academics, policymakers, CEOs, activists, workers’ 
representatives, lobbyists, journalists, and ‘moral machines’. 
Prominent political institutions crafted principles for the ‘ethical 
being’ of the AI companies while tech giants were documenting 
ethics in a series of self-written guidelines. In parallel, a large 
community started to flourish, focusing on how to technically 
embed ethical parameters into algorithmic systems. Founded 
upon the philosophical work of Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-
Paul Sartre, this paper explores the philosophical antinomies of 
the ‘AI Ethics’ debate as well as the conceptual disorientation of 
the ‘fairness discussion’. By bringing the philosophy of 
existentialism to the dialogue, this paper attempts to challenge 
the dialectical monopoly of utilitarianism and sheds fresh light 
on the -already glaring- AI arena. Why is ‘the AI Ethics 
guidelines’ a futile battle doomed to dangerous abstraction? How 
this battle can harm our sense of collective freedom? Which is 
the uncomfortable reality that remains obscured by the smoke-
gas of the ‘AI Ethics’ discussion? And eventually, what’s the 
alternative? There seems to be a different pathway for discussing 
and implementing ethics; A pathway that sets the freedom of 
others at the epicenter of the battle for a sustainable and open to 
all future.  
CCS CONCEPTS 
Computing methodologies~Philosophical/theoretical foundations 
of artificial intelligence • Social and professional topics~Codes of 
ethics    
KEYWORDS 
Ethics, artificial intelligence, algorithms, existentialism, 
philosophy 
ACM Reference format: 
Petros Terzis. 2020. Onward for the freedom of others: Marching beyond 
the AI Ethics. In Proceedings of ACM Conference on Fairness, 
Accountability, and Transparency conference (ACM-FAT* 2020). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 10 pages.  
1 Introduction 
The 'Ethics of AI' has conquered industry news and academic 
literature at least for the last 15 years. Promising endeavors by 
public institutions were cemented in pages of Guiding Principles 
for Ethical Artificial Intelligence and at the same time companies 
tried to take the lead in promoting ethical practices by crafting 
strategies or by setting up ethical boards. Within the same realm, 
a distinct community emerged focusing on how to pragmatically 
and technically embed our ethical commitments and values into 
the systems we build. 
Scholars and journalists have criticized the bigoted emphasis of 
industry leaders, academia and policymakers on the production 
of ‘AI Ethics’, guidelines and policies. In the AI Now Institute’s 
Report [4] it was stated that: ‘ethical codes meant to steer the AI 
field should be accompanied by strong oversight and 
accountability mechanisms’, while Julia Powles and Helen 
Nissenbaum in a widely cited blog post [17] warn that too much 
attention and resources in ‘fixing’ AI eventually leaves no room 
for discussing whether AI should be used at the first place. 
Hence, the prioritization of external and non-self-regulatory 
mechanisms along with the necessity of a broader vision on the 
social utility of AI, are the principal arguments on the 
insufficiency ‘ethics’ and the dearth of the fairness discussion.  
This paper echoes some of these critics and attempts to provide a 
new perspective into the analysis of the current state of affairs in 
the field of AI and Ethics. Firstly, it aims to challenge the 
dialogical monopoly of the 'ethical guidelines' and suggests a 
different approach for the fairness discussion by confronting the 
conceptual grounds and the philosophical foundations on which 
these two research areas have been built. Secondly, this paper 
contributes to the 'ethics debate' by recommending a different 
philosophical perspective to ground and promote the discussion 
on and application of ethics in the real world. This new 
perspective is rooted in the ideas of existentialism as expressed 
†PhD Student, Centre for Information Rights, University of Winchester 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work 
owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
permissions@acm.org. 
FAT* '20, January 27–30, 2020, Barcelona, Spain 
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to the 
Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6936-7/20/01…$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3373152 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6936-7/20/01…$15.00 
Ethics 
P. Terzis 
 
 
 
in the work of Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre. 
References to other representatives of this philosophical realm 
are found throughout the paper. 
Emanating from this philosophical foundation, some of the 
issues to be explored in this article are: How did we end up with 
so much abstraction? What are some of the facts we do not see 
every time we –in good faith- contribute to the AI Ethics debate? 
Which is the most profound and uncomfortable reality that is 
obscured by the smoke-gas of the 'AI ethics' discussion? Why 
allocating our resources in ‘de-biasing’ algorithms can be proven 
a Sisyphean task? And finally, what’s the alternative for building 
ethical systems authentically loyal to social good? 
Beauvoir and Sartre, albeit their sometimes different approaches, 
were prominent figures of existentialism.  Their work could be 
perceived as supplementary of one another. Sartre deals with the 
nature of existentialism; the ingredients of what it means to live 
authentically. Beauvoir, on the other hand, approached the ethics 
of existentialism; what it means to live authentically and act in 
the world around you as a good human being. As existentialists, 
neither of them accepted the universality of any commonly 
shared values nor acknowledged any principle captured as 
'given', somewhere in the abstract world. And this distinct 
characteristic differentiates them from Nietzsche whose ideas 
inspired them both. Nietzsche’s writing for the ‘death of God’ in 
Zarathustra, challenged the 'free spirits' and called them to 
assume the responsibility of crafting a divine teleology to create 
'life-affirming moral and life-enhancing aesthetic values’[5]. 
Now that God is dead, human-beings are alone. In his own 
words: 'Today […] when only the herd animal is honored […] the 
concept of ‘greatness’ entails being noble, wanting to be oneself, 
being capable of being different, standing alone and having to 
live independently’. Contrary to this interpretation that nurtures 
lone individuals who cultivate their ethics in solitude before 
embarking on the task of imposing them on others, Beauvoir and 
Sartre reformulate the discussion by bringing the freedom of the 
self and the freedom of others in the epicenter. For them, ethical 
principles and guidelines, either crafted by those in solitude or 
given by God, are ‘tabula rasa’ unless they recognize the 
predominance of the freedom of the individuals and the burden 
of responsibility that they carry –admittedly- with anguish and 
risk, when they offer themselves in the endeavor to lead an 
ethical life. 
2 An existentialist critique on ethics 
2.1 The freedom of the subject 
‘Your existence precedes your essence’ is perhaps the most 
popular Sartrean axiom[14]. Coupled with his remarkable lecture 
entitled ‘Is Existentialism a Humanism?’[15], these elements 
constitute the essence of his philosophy. 'In choosing anything at 
all, I, first of all, choose freedom' [15] he writes. 
Sartre advocated that there is no prescribed reason dictating our 
being and that there is no recipe on how to pursue our life as 
good and decent human beings. Contrariwise, the argument 
continues, the -sometimes inconvenient- truth is that we are all 
free. We are free to decide what to do and what to become. Free 
to choose whether to give or take, play or leave, call or pass, 
comply or disobey. If we decide to conform to certain norms or 
follow specific guidelines it is us who freely choose to do so. And 
if we act as people expect from us to act this is again a result of 
our free choice as free individuals. Nothing precedes our choices, 
neither the fictional state that we are used in calling 'character', 
nor some abstractly defined norms crafted by someone's God. 
Existentialism is by no means founded upon the demonstrations 
of the non-existence of God. It declares, Sartre writes, ‘that even 
if God existed that would make no difference from its point of 
view. Not that we believe God does exist, but we think that the 
real problem is not that of His existence; what [man] needs is to 
find himself again and to understand that nothing can save him 
from himself, not even a valid proof of the existence of God. In 
this sense existentialism is optimistic'. By 'God', the reader 
should define any dogma, doctrine or theory that comes with an 
objective, impossible to appeal context as a given truth. In that 
perspective, objectivity, scientific justification and rational 
reasoning are becoming an inherently limited process that 
inhibits our journey towards disclosing our true selves. 'When I 
deliberate… the chips are down’ Sartre explains in that logical 
argumentation is only a small piece of the puzzle of our 
subjectivity for it cannot disclose the deeper emotional instincts 
that guide our choices and subsequently, our lives.  
Such a disclosure, Beauvoir adds in the ‘Ethics of Ambiguity’ [2] 
‘implies a perpetual tension to keep being at a certain distance, 
to tear oneself from the world, and to assert oneself as a 
freedom. To wish for the disclosure of the world and to assert 
oneself as freedom are one and the same movement’. Freedom, 
thus, becomes the foundational condition of our existence and 
those who want freedom must want it categorically, 
unequivocally and universally. Linked with and emanating from 
our existence, our freedom has nothing ready-made in it. It is not 
illuminated by an abstract sphere of pure morality nor does it 
emerge from uncontested principles set by others or God. Our 
freedom consists of the values it establishes and through which 
it is fulfilled. Beauvoir summarizes it as follows: ‘To will oneself 
moral and to will oneself free are one and the same decision’[2].  
The same goes, an existentialist would continue, for any attempt 
aiming at crystallizing value-laden principles in paper. In that 
sense, the ‘AI Ethics’ discussion is a genuine fallacy for it does 
not address one of the most fundamental issues in the field of 
advanced computational technology: the freedom and the 
subjectivity of all the agents involved, be it the CEO of a tech-
giant, the project manager, the business analyst, the developer or 
the micro-worker. On the contrary, all the institutions involved 
in the deliberations for crafting these principles, albeit their 
distinct point of departure, are trying to cement principles and 
guidelines which will end up as ‘given’ to the world. Hence, by 
ignoring the limits of their subjective choices, they pretend that 
the irrefutable value of their products (or objects) is somehow 
rooted and certified in them. To exacerbate the issue, the lack of 
reference to the subjectivity of the individuals present and acting 
in the arena of AI, is supplemented by a trend of carpeting this 
Ethics 
ACM-FAT*’20, January, 2020, Barcelona, Spain 
 
 
subjectivity under a fictional personification that treats the 
already elusive 'Artificial Intelligence' as a distinct, separately 
recognizable agent. Indeed, most of us, do not talk about the 
'Ethics of the AI Companies' let alone the 'Ethics of the AI's 
CEOs and/or developers'. Instead, we are building an additional 
layer of protection for the latter's realization of freedom of 
choice and responsibility by inventing imaginary subjectivities. 
With our project in itself being so abstract and elusive how do 
we expect the commonly agreed values to become something 
more than a potential hindrance from our acceptance of freedom 
and responsibility? 
Similarly, although the discussion on machine learning 
techniques and algorithmic design are useful as they provide 
developers with something to contemplate and reflect upon, the 
scientific community should not treat these techniques as a 
panacea for building fair applications. We should always bear in 
mind, an existentialist would argue, that being 'fair' and 'ethical' 
are not fixed elements granted to a subject with certification-
based procedures and compliance exercises, but instead, they 
consist deliberate choices according to which the individual shall 
lead its life the way it chooses to do so. In this context, machine 
learning techniques might indeed provide effective tools to help 
developers reflect on their design choices. However, there exists 
the risk of using these techniques as a 'ticket' to evade the 
burden of responsibility, a phenomenon that Sartre referred to as 
'bad faith'. 
2.2 Bad faith 
To understand the Sartrean concept of 'bad faith', we first need 
to introduce ourselves to the duality of our existence as 
described by Sartre and to further dichotomize our being into 
our being-in-itself and our being-for-itself. The latter denotes 
'how things are' or 'how things are given'. It is the objective 
sphere of facticity, the ‘given world’ within which facts like our 
physical characteristics, our talents, our neighbors, our past or 
our scheduled trajectory, solidify our current situation. On the 
other hand, being-in-itself is procedural. It is a transition, a 
journey that ends when we realize our thesis in this given world. 
It is the sphere of transcendence that is fulfilled by the time 
individuals raise their consciousness to the understanding of 
their subjectivity within a particular given situation. This 
transcendence is eventually our realization of the freedom we 
enjoy and the responsibility we shoulder. Everything that stands 
between these two spheres is corrosive of our transcendence.  
‘Bad faith’ is in this context a wall intentionally built by 
ourselves that separates our duality and inhibits our 
transcendence. It is a way of willfully blinding ourselves from 
seeing the space within which we have to raise our 
consciousness for realizing our freedom; a way of running away 
from the conceptualization of our responsibility.  ‘Bad faith’ 
stands for everything that constantly leads us to the passive and 
comfortable acceptance that ‘it is what it is’. Sartre aptly 
describes this by witnessing a waiter in a café going from one 
table to another, carefully holding his tray and leaning forward 
politely when listening to customers. The waiter is in bad faith 
when he accepts these attitudes and his ‘waiter’ identity as 
something natural from which he cannot escape.  
To land it in our argumentation, an existence in ‘bad faith’ refers 
to the individuals, be it industry leaders, lobbyists, or developers, 
who hide themselves behind the curtains of the others’ 
expectations or the disguise of the corporate environment in 
order to evade the anguish and the risk of realizing the burden of 
responsibility that they pragmatically shoulder. A lobbyist in a 
suit who strolls down the hallway of the European Parliament, 
with his iPhone always at hand, messaging automatically 
without even looking at the intern upon whom he stumbles to 
receive a coffee stamp on his shirt, is no different than the 
Sartrean waiter in the café who remains restricted to other 
people’s expectations and thus, in bad faith. Similarly, 
companies’ CEOs who preach general ethical principles while at 
the same time follow the ‘business necessity’ of competing with 
other similar preachers in suspicious use of AI technology 
because ‘we need to move fast’, circumvent from standing up to 
the realization of their responsibility and they are doing so by 
using the fictional concept of competition as a pretext. As a 
result, generally expressed norms, abstract formalities, and 
illusive statements are thus being transformed into tickets for 
escaping the transcendence beyond our given situation and, 
eventually, lead us to accept that 'this is just the way things are'. 
Thus, life in bad faith delays our transcendence and the 
realization of our freedom thereby perpetuating our pernicious 
swirling in the cage of our given world. 
2.3 Ethics are inherently ambiguous and 
human-beings inherently biased. 
Have you ever found yourself in a challenging conversation with 
a group of friends, where one of the group calmingly and 
persuasively says: ‘Look, you know I am objective and impartial 
on this, right?’. Well, if Beauvoir was among your group of 
friends that day, she would probably interrupt your friend only 
to say ‘No, you are not, but please go on’.  
Because Beauvoir believed that objectivity is inhuman and every 
effort to claim otherwise is nothing but a biased assertion 
beclouded by our denial to realize our subjectivity. According to 
Beauvoir: ’[the objective man] does not have to choose between 
the highway and the native, between America and Russia, 
between production and freedom. He understands, dominates, 
and rejects, in the name of total truth, the necessarily partial 
truths which every human engagement discloses’[…]. Lost in the 
illusion of objectivity, the 'impartial man' denies the subjectivity 
of his judgment rendering himself a 'shameful servant of a cause 
to which he has not chosen to rally'. By supporting the objective 
truth, the argument continues, he places his 'object' as the only 
truth. 
However, Beauvoir did not consider our inescapable bias to be 
an inferior characteristic of our nature as human beings. On the 
contrary, she believed that the conceptualization of our biases 
within a world full of biased people is the first step for our 
transcendence towards our subjectivity as free individuals.  
Whereas, declining our biases and preaching our objectivity is a 
Ethics 
P. Terzis 
 
 
 
characteristic of a self-imposed tyranny that will eventually seek 
to impose itself on the outside world. 
Today, the utilitarian argument that perceives technology as 
something intrinsically neutral has become 'common sense'. Of 
course, there is nothing wrong with the commonly used sophism 
that regards technology as a tool that can be used both in good 
and bad ways. However, it is by no means self-evident that, due 
to this indisputable fact, the creators of a certain tool are 
themselves neutral. Of course, a gun can be used both by an 
individual who targets innocent people and by a police officer 
who shoots the killer in the leg. However, the ontological 
existence of both possibilities does not equate with neutrality. 
For gun manufacturers would fool themselves if they 
camouflaged their deliberate choices under the argument of the 
ex-post transformation of the objects they put in the market. 
Because, by manufacturing guns, apart from getting different 
pieces of metal together, they simultaneously make the value-
laden statement that, sometimes, killing people is good1.  
Similarly, a research scientist that tries to design technical 
parameters for fair and transparent use of facial recognition by 
the police, implicitly acknowledges that sometimes mass 
surveillance of our biometrical characteristics in public places is 
good. To deny this subtle but emphatic articulation of our 
responsibility under the disguise of a hypothetical and 
unsubstantiated notion of ‘neutrality’ would be bad faith 
according to Sartre; Beauvoir would perhaps use the word 
‘tyranny’.  
Irrespective of our acceptance or not of the existentialism as 
philosophical background, Beauvoir’s ideas on ethics and human 
biases, as expressed mainly in her essay ‘The Ethics of 
Ambiguity’[2], are penetrating for they can stimulate our 
thinking towards both the current state of affairs in the technical 
realm of machine learning as well as the general ‘AI ethics’ 
debate. It’s worth mentioning at this point that Beauvoir, talking 
about the ‘Ethics of Ambiguity’ twenty years or so after its 
publication, was explicitly angry with her-then-self. In her 
autobiography ‘The Force of the Circumstance’[3], she confesses: 
‘My descriptions of the nihilist, the adventurer, the esthete, 
obviously influenced by those of Hegel, are even more arbitrary 
and abstract than his, since they are not even linked together by 
a historical development; […](emphasis added) I was in error 
when I thought I could define a morality independent of a social 
context’. This paper echoes this later self-review of hers; 
Morality is explained as a concept inextricably linked with the 
social context from which it is engineered and to which it 
contributes. In that sense, existentialism –or at least our 
existentialism- is non-individualistic.  
2.3.1 Algorithmic de-biasing. First of all, Beauvoir’s argument 
around the unavoidability of human biases touches upon the 
research efforts to de-bias algorithmic systems and datasets. To 
 
1 This example was introduced by Matthew Beard, Associate Lecturer at the 
University of Notre Dame Australia and a Fellow at the Ethics Centre, during his 
keynote speech at the Ethics of Data Science Conference 2019, University of 
Sydney. I hope I transferred it accurately.  
accept the innate biases of human beings is to accept that 
everything we are dealing with is an articulation of biased 
subjectivities and that those who are called to de-bias the 
systems are themselves biased. The reference in our inextricable 
ambiguity, however, is not an argument to diminish the value of 
our efforts. Contrariwise, the moment we realize the innate 
biases in every human-being, ourselves included, is the moment 
we fully conceptualize two vital elements for our endeavor. 
The first one is a warning, highlighting that the efforts to de-bias 
a system do not emanate from our tendency to be objective; by 
building or calling for measures for fairness, transparency or 
accountability, humans do not attempt to render algorithms 
objective. What they aim, is the building of systems that are 
biased towards what they perceive as optimal. For example, by 
presenting a model for fairness at a global conference, a 
researcher does not claim that she wants to build fair systems. 
What she declares, is that she wants systems to be fair according 
to her subjective interpretation of the word 'fair'. This may not 
be a problem in certain conferences where what is optimal for 
me might as well coincide with what is optimal for my next-
seating participant. But things will become more complicated 
when our 'optimalities' stumble upon other people's ones. What 
is 'fair' or 'transparent' for me, might not be the same with what 
a privacy advocate or a CEO of an AI company considers as 
such.   
The second assertion that derives from our acceptance of the 
unavoidability of human biases, is even more telling. For 
accepting that bias is inherent in every human being and dataset, 
which are also inherently and inextricably biased as they have 
been based on human decisions, generates a thorny question: 
Are we content with using machine learning systems to produce 
seemingly objective but inherently subjective outcomes? Are we 
happy by surrendering all the elements that we cannot change 
for they constitute our 'given world' (our height, our neighbors, 
our date of birth, our skin, our friends, our past calls, our past 
convictions, etc) to a system that will use biased assertions in an 
attempt to lodge other people's subjectivities and expectations to 
our sphere of 'given'? For example, if I know that all police data 
are -and will always be biased- and if I do not believe that we 
will ever reach a point where police officers will make unbiased 
decisions, why should I even start the discussion of de-biasing 
them? And if I believe that my facial characteristics, which are 
part of the things I cannot change should not be a basis for other 
people’s subjective and biased assertions about my subjectivity, 
wouldn’t de-biasing be a challenge inherently futile? Why 
should I speak the same language with people whose ends are 
elusive and take part in endeavors whose goals are unattainable? 
Beauvoir writes: ‘I was — like Sartre — insufficiently liberated 
from the ideologies of my class; at the very moment I was 
rejecting them, I was still using their language to do so. That 
language has become hateful to me because, as I now know, to 
look for the reasons why one should not stamp on a man's face is 
to accept stamping on it’[3]. Ultimately, does this negation 
render every attempt to deal with data meaningless?  
Ethics 
ACM-FAT*’20, January, 2020, Barcelona, Spain 
 
 
By no means, I would answer. For it seems that there is a 
qualitative difference between a system that estimates the risk of 
breast cancer and another that predicts the likelihood of re-
offending. In the first case, the subject is dealing with a system 
that estimates the possibility of an event that will be (or not) part 
of its future 'given world' (of the objects that cannot be altered); 
this system eventually delivers an X percentage that could be 
expressed as follows: 'Today your sphere of all the things you 
cannot alter, changes (because an X% of breast cancer has been 
added) due to the fact that your future factual situation (your 
status as being diagnosed or not with breast cancer) is likely to 
change'. Whereas, in the case of a system that predicts the 
likelihood of re-offending, the subject is confronting with an 
event that is likely (or not) to occur in its future sphere of 
subjectivity (its free choice to re-offend) and which, although 
produced by a system based on inherently biased subjects and 
despite the event's linkage with its future being, is injected into 
its sphere of present 'given world' like a prophecy that its 
doomed to happen. The system, in this case, says: 'Today your 
sphere of all the things you cannot alter, changes (because an X% 
of re-offending has been added) because your future subjectivity 
(whether you will freely choose to re-offend) is likely to change’. 
And granted that we are all biased, this process of objectification 
of other people’s subjectivities in a subject’s sphere of the 
‘given’, must seem alarming for it obscures the subject’s present 
situation by interfering with its future transcendence. Hence, if 
we accept the unavoidability and omnipresence of bias within 
human beings, dealing with de-biasing systems that, although 
emanating from things we cannot change, end up producing 
subjective assertions about our future subjectivities, engenders 
an existential anomaly.  
2.3.2 The hypocrisy of the ethical person. Ambiguity lies at 
the heart of our existence and this is by no means a reason to 
reject it. To disclose our truth is to transcend to our subjectivity, 
renounce the very possibility of objectivity and embrace the 
challenge of seeking our biases. Think of it as a mindful process 
towards self-awareness. An honest discussion with ourselves 
which repudiates the 'non-judgmental' stance that traditional 
mindfulness promotes. This mindful journey towards the 
realization of our biases demands the confrontation of our 
freedom; It is a ladder towards our transcendence and, as such, it 
is a process paved in a road of anguish and risk; Individuals that 
walk this ladder, understand that being ethical -or whatever else 
you claim to be- 'is not a matter of being right in the eyes of a 
God, but of being right in their own eyes' as Beauvoir says[…]. 
By rejecting the illusion of a refuge built to host our 
consciousness and guarantee our existence before our 
transcendence, individuals will also refuse to believe in ready-
made and unconditioned values whose aim is to objectify and 
fossilize someone else’s object as truth.  
Had Beauvoir lived the dawn of the AI era, she would be rather 
skeptical about those people or groups of people who hold 
themselves to the world as 'devoted to our well-being' or others 
who 'value our privacy'. This is because Beauvoir did not believe 
in anyone's absolute aim. On the contrary, she constantly warns 
her reader about those people that insist on the objectivity of 
their aims. She believes that this category is an example of 
people who, caged in their 'given world' (facticity), have avoided 
the anguish and risk of their transcendence. By doing so they 
became a kind of tyrant, for tyrants, as well, rest in the absolute 
of their aims and usually preach their objectivity as something 
emerging from other abstract objectivities such as God, the 
legacy of a nation or someone's character. Conversely, the free 
man does not look for a priori certified values, thoughts, and 
aims; the free individual, Beauvoir continues, will keep asking 
themselves ‘Am I really working for the liberation of [men]?’.  
In this context, it is illusionary to believe that sailing in the high 
seas of ethics is a journey destined to reach a certain port where 
everything is ethereal.  Even worse, in case we have a captain on 
board who keeps turning the rudder towards this hypothetically 
ethereal destination, then we are doomed to paddle endlessly and 
vainly. Seeking ethics is a journey whose ends are neither 
predefined nor even defined. The honest and good captain would 
draw a map by putting destinations in parentheses because to 
name a destination as ‘optimal’ is like falling into a naïve, 
uncontested abstraction. Beauvoir describes this aptly: ‘We don't 
ask the physicist, "Which hypotheses are true?" Nor the artist, 
"By what procedures does one produce a work whose beauty is 
guaranteed?" Ethics does not furnish recipes any more than do 
science and art. One can merely propose methods’.  
As a result, demonstrating your moral goal or building roadmaps 
with bullet-points on how you plan to become ethical is a hollow 
attempt neither worth your time nor the public's attention. The 
only viable solution would be to formulate clear and persuasive 
techniques for safeguarding and deepening your commitment to 
being ethical, be open about them and test them repeatedly. 
2.3 Agreeing on ethics for all is an illusion 
The following remark, influenced by the impact Marxism had on 
Beauvoir, might seem rather unsettling to the reader but it 
would be disrespectful to omit it for it lies in the heart of 
Beauvoir's ideas on ethics. As she explains: '[man] is not alone in 
the world; different [men] have different forms of well-being; to 
work for some [men] is often to work against others; one cannot 
settle on this peaceful solution: to want the well-being of all 
[men]. We must define our well-being. The error of Kantian 
morals is to have pretended to do without one's presence in the 
world; in this manner it only ends in abstract formulas; the 
respect of a human being, in general, is not enough to guide us; 
for we have to deal with separate, opposing individuals: the 
human being exists in his entirety in both the victim and the 
executioner; are we to let the victim perish or kill the 
executioner?'  
Beauvoir believed that oppression divides the world into two 
clans: from the one side, there are those who present themselves 
as defenders of certain values with an authority deriving from a 
natural, undisputable source of morality, be it God, the nation or 
something else. On the other side, there are those who 'mark 
time hopelessly to merely support the collectivity' whose life 
ends up being a mechanical repetition. The oppressor gets 
Ethics 
P. Terzis 
 
 
 
stronger by keeping the oppressed imprisoned in their 'given 
world' and presents this anti-transcendence as something natural 
against which any revolt is purposeless since nature does not err. 
We do not necessarily need to adopt the argument that divides 
people between oppressors and oppressed or between victims 
and executioners to appreciate the relevance of Beauvoir’s 
thoughts in our discussion. For there always lies the danger of 
subjects leaping into the immanence of their ‘given world’ 
guided by sophisms about principles that other ‘serious people’2 
are tasked to safeguard. These ‘serious people’ are well aware of 
this sophism and instead of constantly striving for freedom and 
responsibility by asking themselves ‘am I doing the right thing?’, 
they prefer presenting themselves as the defenders of certain 
values. Beauvoir [2] describes them as follows: ‘It is not in their 
own name that they are fighting, but rather in the name of 
civilization, of institutions, of monuments, and of virtues which 
realize objectively the situation which they intend to maintain; 
[…] they defend a past which has assumed the icy dignity of 
being against an uncertain future whose values have not yet 
been won’.  
An ‘AI Ethics’ roundtable usually includes academics, 
government officials, policymakers, researchers, lobbyists, 
workers' representatives, human rights advocates, and 
journalists. Every participant has her preconceptions of what it 
means to be ethical. Objectifying these diverse approaches to 'set 
them in stone' can only be achieved through abstraction. This 
agreement on abstraction is what Beauvoir considers to be 
illusionary, for you cannot agree on a common basis when your 
points of departure are diametrically distinct; as for example 
when you embark on this challenge by having 'red-lines' while at 
the same time the industry leaders have only 'critical 
concerns'[11]. Furthermore, this abstraction is dangerous in itself 
if it is to be perceived as a natural procedure that is inspired by 
the ethical character of those that set it up. Because by signing a 
report for ‘ethical AI’, one implicitly reaffirms the morality of all 
the signatories. In the end, we are left with an illusion of 
agreement, endowed with a sense of a natural consensus on 
what is ethical and as such, it cannot be contested. After all, who 
could disagree with the phrase: 'Ensure the AI system's language 
and behaviors do not reinforce undesirable and unfair 
stereotypes and biases [13]’? 
3 Towards a transcendence to authentic ethics 
By viewing the ‘AI ethics’ discussion through the philosophical 
lenses of Beauvoir and Sartre, I by no means aspire to condemn 
the relevant initiatives undertaken in good faith by prestigious 
democratic institutions. Although I accept such a potential result 
as a direct consequence of my reference to the above school of 
thought, I am afraid that the primary message of this article will 
be ignored if it is to be perceived as a mere critic of the current 
status-quo. This article aims to illuminate the ‘AI Ethics’ arena 
 
2 This term is used by Beauvoir to refer to those present who present themselves to 
the world as defenders of certain values. 
from a different angle and challenge the philosophical monopoly 
of utilitarianism that pervades the ‘given world’ of technology. 
Its goal is to help the reader realize the ‘given’s’ potential to 
annihilate human freedom if it is to be perceived as a one-and-
only solution and, finally, to understand the process towards 
surpassing this deceptive sense of inevitability. This article 
aspires to model an intellectual arsenal to challenge the game of 
ethics as it set today, and calls the reader to avoid it, or accept it 
and follow it as long as she/he freely and consciously chooses to 
do so. 
An alternative framework for building ethical AI would be 
founded on the subjectivity of the individuals involved in the 
development process. This framework, free from ‘objectively’ 
ethical criteria, will take the form of a reflective process during 
which the individuals will obtain a clear understanding of their 
freedom and responsibility; At the end, they will eventually be 
judged according to their choices. Similar alternative 
frameworks based on relevant philosophical grounds have also 
been proposed for business management [9] and architectural 
design [1].  
The following section tries to shape the landscape for this 
alternative framework.  
4 A proposal 
Despite our focus on the subjectivity of the individuals, it would 
be delusive and contradictory to our non-individualistic view on 
freedom, to assert that individuals alone and by themselves can 
achieve their morality and that eventually someday all humans 
will be moral and free. Freedom and morality are meaningless 
unless they are to be enjoyed among people who are free and 
moral. Hence, the ethics of the individuals in the AI world is 
influenced by the architects of the ecosystem within which they 
enact, in our case the corporations. Without their contribution, 
any individual attempt to ‘live ethically’ will be heroic but 
eternally insufficient. As a result, the proposed framework is 
divided into two parts in order firstly to suggest quasi 
institutional changes for the corporate environment and, 
secondly, a roadmap for those engaged in this world to 
conceptualize their authentic selves.  
4.1 The ethics of the business models 
Beauvoir writes: ‘As we have seen, my freedom, in order to fulfill 
itself, requires that it emerge into an open future: it is other men 
who open the future to me, it is they who, setting up the world 
of tomorrow, define my future; but if, instead of allowing me to 
participate in this constructive movement, they oblige me to 
consume my transcendence in vain, if they keep me below the 
level which they have conquered and on the basis of which new 
conquests will be achieved then they are cutting me off from the 
future, they are changing me into a thing’. 
Our transcendence towards freedom should be perceived as an 
activity nurtured by those who fashion the world in which we 
act; a ‘constructive movement’ whose success is conditioned on 
my participation. With this in mind, companies should not even 
Ethics 
ACM-FAT*’20, January, 2020, Barcelona, Spain 
 
 
consider drafting codes of ethical conduct for their employees, 
let alone undertake initiatives for global ‘AI Ethics’. ‘AI Ethics’ is 
not a standalone enterprise decoupled from the rest of the 
business ecosystem. For this reason, companies that want to 
build ‘ethical AI’ will demonstrate a loyal and constant 
commitment not to build, but to live ethically; ethically towards 
their employees and their clients; and ethically towards their 
goals for a better and sustainable future. There is no ‘ethical AI’, 
unless there is an ‘ethical’ supply chain, clean from conflict 
materials; an ‘ethical’ UX/UI design, free from manipulative dark 
patterns; an ‘ethical’ workforce, comprised of ethical micro-
workers; an ‘ethical’ decision-making process, conditioned on 
the parameter of climate justice; and eventually, an ‘ethical’ 
reconsideration of the ‘data-driven’ necessity.   
The shareholder-centric approach that dominated the economic 
culture of our world for over a century, had a severe impact on 
the profit formulas of digital businesses. Being ‘data-driven’ has 
now become the new ‘common sense’ for our economy; a 
Gramscian ‘hegemonic culture’ [6] which ended up being 
regarded as natural. But this relentless strife for accelerating the 
‘data-drive’ always comes with trade-offs and ethical 
compromises. For this reason, an authentic commitment to 
ethics will require business model reconsiderations.    
Such a process will begin by institutionalizing the appropriate 
mechanisms for building awareness on what the company is 
doing at any given moment. Instead of declining to comment, 
companies will be open to public scrutiny and as subjects by 
themselves, they will be critiqued by their employees and the 
public based on their choices, and not by their motives or 
declarations. Ethical companies will abandon dishonest and bad-
faith attempts to mask the range of available options by putting 
them below the carpet of some fictional inevitability; they will 
assume responsibility for every choice they make. A Sartrean 
existentialist, for example, would not require a tech-giant to give 
away the data it uses for developing its systems. Instead, she 
would demand from the company not to hide this choice behind 
bad faith arguments such as proprietary rights. As long as you 
freely and consciously choose to lock your treasure away from 
public investigation and research, Sartre is happy3. Pretending 
you have lost the keys is, however, problematic.  
Similarly, companies that want to suffer the anguish and risk of 
becoming ethical will be called to cultivate an open ecosystem 
for their employees; a business environment that is more 
democratic and open to dialogue and inquiry. In such an 
environment, employees will be encouraged to question the 
moral choices of the company and debate ethical issues that they 
encounter at the workplace. They will not be kept in the dark 
about the initiatives of their employer and there will be no secret 
teams working in mystifying branches. A new model that wishes 
to inspire morality will be a business ecosystem where 
individuals will enjoy a zone of autonomy and will be 
incentivized to understand and embrace full responsibility for 
 
3 Beauvoir is not and we will soon see why.  
their actions as a prerequisite for enjoying a democratic 
environment. 
But what are, someone may reasonably ask, the nature of this 
responsibility and the burden of this freedom? Indeed, if left 
vague, the argument would risk to contradict itself.   
This brings us to the second pillar of the suggested framework; 
How individuals who act and design in the AI world could fit in 
such a new business environment? How they, in turn, undertake 
the onerous task of pursuing an ethical career?  
4.2 Towards an authentic self-awareness 
4.2.1 Acceptance of freedom The pathway towards the 
conceptualization of our true freedom is a reflective process to 
comprehend and disclose: 1) all the ‘objects’ that constitute our 
‘given world and cannot be altered; 2) the potential elements that 
could lure us in evading our responsibility thereby inhibiting our 
transcendence to the awareness of our freedom and 3) the 
ontological possibility of every choice that we have at any given 
moment. 
For example, picture a data scientist that has undertaken the task 
of building a job-recruitment tool. Given the strict deadline, she 
has limited time to explore the datasets with which she will feed 
her system. As a result, she cannot exclude the possibility of 
discriminatory results. In understanding her situation, the data 
scientist will first have to identify the boundaries of her ‘given 
world’. She will need to be aware of all the elements she cannot 
change i.e. the deadline, her working hours, her family 
responsibilities or the luring bonus. Secondly, she has to take 
ownership of her actions. The deadline, her work or family are 
nothing more than pieces of a puzzle that altogether shape her 
situational facticity. She can neither change them nor can she 
utilize them to escape the transcendence process towards 
undertaking full responsibility for her final choice and actions, 
because this will be bad faith. Thirdly, and perhaps more 
importantly, she must acknowledge the ontological possibility of 
every choice. For example, she could do whatever possible given 
the resources at hand or ask to work extra hours. She could as 
well mitigate some of the system's errors after the delivery of the 
system or disclose its weaknesses in due time and risk 
authorship of and bonus from the task because 'someone will do 
it'. She could finally blow the whistle and join the emerging 
tech-resistance. Whatever she eventually decides to do, it will be 
her choice. Accepting it is her first step to transcendence.   
Heidegger believed that to exist is to be historical [8]; to 
understand my existence, I must set it side-by-side to something 
that defines my historical heritage. For Heidegger, every time I 
act, I take part in a narrative unity that recollects the past to give 
meaning to the present; and ‘when I choose, I exemplify a 
standard for the others as well’[18]. On the same realm, Marcuse, 
considers this historical dimension along with the operational 
rationality to consist the two opposite dimensions of our 
universe: ‘The suppression of [the historical dimension] in the 
societal unity of operational rationality is a suppression of 
history, and this is not an academic but a political affair’ he 
writes[10].  
Ethics 
P. Terzis 
 
 
 
Today, there are those developers who are ‘just engineers’ and 
whose job is not ‘to take political stances’ because they are afraid 
of ‘letting the perfect be the enemy of the good’[7]. This 
category of developers exists as a narrative continuation of all 
those coders that have historically perceived their job as the 
apotheosis of functionality: the strife to reach an objective ends 
even if you have to objectively reformulate our problem along 
the way[12]. For them, the prioritization of functionality defines 
their fate, not deterministically, but by providing something that 
they inherited from their historical situation to claim them and 
understand their existence. They are developers because 
thousands of developers over the last decades have shaped a 
relevant standard of what it means to exist as a developer.  
Today, this very historical heritage is challenged by a distinct 
historical block of developers who have moved from the safe ‘we 
just build’ to the creative and (r)evolutionary ‘we won’t build’; 
these developers reject outright the dominance of operational 
rationality; for these developers, before wondering what or how 
to build, you need to ask why[16]? What this historical 
alternative fundamentally declares is that ‘your freedom as a 
developer expands well beyond your professional status-quo’. 
Developers do not just build products anymore. They fashion 
experiences and through them, they create futures. A developer 
of this block exists not only to build but also –and perhaps 
fundamentally- for not to build. She/he ultimately becomes a 
new ‘something’ for other developers to reflect on and claim 
their existence, thereby challenging the traditional 'common 
sense' of what it means to exist as a developer.   
Each one of these historical blocks comes with different 
conceptualizations of freedom but irrespective of how we might 
feel about our role in the world, there are responsibilities we 
cannot evade.  
4.2.2 Acceptance of a universal responsibility In his seminal public 
lecture entitled ‘Existentialism as Humanism’[15], Sartre shaped 
the notion of such a responsibility. Admittedly, if the latter is to 
be perceived holistically, it might seem frightening. It is of no 
surprise that he considered a life in which we experience our 
responsibility, as a life full of anguish; an anguish rooted in two 
equally daunting conceptions.  
Firstly, it derives from the realization that we are responsible for 
what we do and there is nowhere we can lay this burden other 
than our shoulders. No abstract principles, no inescapable 
present situations, and no inevitable future outcomes; There are 
not strange powers and there is no God. As Beauvoir further 
remarks: 'A God can pardon, efface, and compensate. But if God 
does not exist, [man's] faults are inexpiable'. Everything we 
think or say contrary to this is nothing but a bad faith attempt to 
hide, mask our responsibility and escape our transcendence-
again in vain.   
Yet the second source of the same anguish might perhaps seem 
more intimidating to those aspiring to lead an ethical life. 
Because, even when I accept my full responsibility for 
everything I choose, I have to acknowledge that what I do in my 
life is an implicit statement of what everyone else ought to do. 
The Sartrean idea of universalism is the first compass for the 
ethical well-being of the individuals. It is a powerful message 
saying: ‘act as If the entire world is watching you and is waiting 
to mirror your choices’. It is an ‘Onward’ call that invokes our 
subjectivity and urges it to canvass the image of the world it 
dreams of living in. A message that renders every choice we 
make an example of the life we want to pursue.  
To illustrate this, think of a scientist that presents her machine 
learning model on how to embed fairness into algorithmic 
decision-making systems at the technical track of a global 
conference. Firstly, she understands that the guarantees provided 
by statistical techniques for her proposed model do not absolve 
her of her responsibility to accept the outcomes of her model's 
failures and unintended consequences. She understands that her 
responsibility extends well beyond theoretical guarantees. 
Second, and more importantly, by proposing her model, she 
understands that she is not just providing a mathematical model 
but, in fact, proclaiming to others that her model leads to a better 
outcome for all the people involved including, but not limited to, 
data subjects. Her responsibility begins, not ends, with the 
model. Through her model, she is now responsible to society at 
large4.  
4.2.3 Act and design for freedom 'OK, I am now a free man and I 
know my universal responsibility. What's next?' someone would 
reasonably wonder. Indeed, Sartre gave us the compass of 
universalism to illuminate the normative context of our 
responsibility but has left the respective context of freedom on a 
subjective and formal basis. 'One of the chief objections leveled 
against existentialism is that the precept "to will freedom" is only 
a hollow formula and offers no concrete content for action', 
Beauvoir admits. 'You are a free man', Sartre awkwardly 
answered to a student who asked for his advice on the existential 
dilemma he was facing whether to join the Resistance or stay 
home to help his mother. 'But what am I supposed to do with my 
freedom, sir?' I wish he asked. He did not and thus we missed a 
chance to listen to the Sartrean teleological perspective on 
freedom. Beauvoir filled that gap. And, to my perspective, her 
ideas on the telos, the scope of freedom are valuable not only for 
the AI community but for the entirety of our world.  
Similar to the child’s example in the ‘Ethics of Ambiguity', when 
we connect to the Web, we cast ourselves to a universe we have 
not helped to establish; a universe that has been fabricated 
without us and to which the only thing we can do is submit. In 
such a world, data are assets, cookies are necessary, 
advertisements are inevitable, the 4G network needs 
subscription fees, social media are connecting people and private 
companies profit from our inputs. These are all given facts that 
seem to us as inevitable as our breath. They are always there -
and they will always be- waiting patiently for our connection 
and submissions. Like children in a world of adults, we do not 
 
4 I am grateful to the first anonymous reviewer for her/his contribution specifically 
on -but not limited to- this point. The example of the scientist in this paragraph is 
copied by her/his comments on another example I had used to illustrate the 
universal responsibility of the scientist. The comments provided during the review 
process made me realize that my initial perspective was narrow.  
Ethics 
ACM-FAT*’20, January, 2020, Barcelona, Spain 
 
 
want to change anything and we do not even think of the 
possibility of doing so. We are happily naïve about staying 
always connected to this chaotic universe of collective 
irresponsibility. 
The inconvenient truth is that most of us will keep feeling that 
way until the day we die. Just like the child that casts itself in a 
world of adults where it does not even think of the possibility of 
intervening to change the order of things, we, the children of 
this new world, will spend our digital life exercising our freedom 
only within the given boundaries that we found upon connection 
and according to those rules that we abide by when entered; or 
other rules that will be fashioned for us –again- by others. We 
have yet to raise ourselves to the consciousness of this 
enthrallment; Yet, there exactly lies the context for action for all 
of those who dream for an open future.  
The most powerful message that Beauvoir conveyed through her 
work is her view of what it means to will freedom. According to 
her, no freedom can be enjoyed in solitude. There is no 
individual freedom severed from the rest of the world. To will 
freedom, to want other people to explore their options for 
liberation and, subsequently to will all of them to be free is one 
and the same thing. To will freedom is to will the freedom of 
others. 
In our emerging digital world, no one will have the luxury of 
feeling free in the solitude of her computer. Her cookies will be 
processed just like any other visitor's; her data will be accessed 
and shared among various entities with or without her consent; 
and her Alexa will hear her argument with her significant other 
just like anyone's else; If you are lucky enough to have learnt 
some techniques and developed some way of securing your data 
and privacy then again you will not be substantially free. You 
will have only achieved a larger room to play in. In such a world, 
the responsibility lies in the hands of those who know the 
architecture of the place and the rules of the game. It's them who 
are commissioned to call for freedom, design for freedom and act 
for freedom. The responsibility for an open future lies primarily 
on their shoulders. By willing to transcend to their subjectivity 
and by renouncing everything 'given', these people are our only 
escape from being hardened and lost into the absurdity of our 
'given world'. Simultaneously, we, the happily naïve children of 
this world, are the only possible way for their transcendence 
towards freedom. 'For a freedom wills itself genuinely only by 
willing itself as an indefinite movement through the freedom of 
others', Beauvoir keeps reminding the reader. 
The moral compass that points at the ethical life is thus located 
in our thrust for our subjective and collective freedom. The 
designer, the CEO, the lobbyist or the activist have one thing 
through which to filtrate their available options when 
confronting ethical decisions: which option will eventually 
magnify the freedom of others affected by my choice? Inasmuch as 
these people who hold the keys for our open future and 
everyone else who accepts the possibility of his/her subjective 
freedom, are determinant in undertaking the anguish and risk of 
being free, they shall withstand dishonest attempts of bad faith 
that wane their will for freedom. Instead, they always need to 
bear in mind that: ‘To want existence, to want to disclose the 
world, and to want [men] to be free are one and the same 
will’[2]. 
Hence, coupled with the imperative for the transformation of the 
business culture and environment, the suggested alternative 
framework for furnishing ethics within organizations requires 
that: 1) individuals will understand, embrace and strive for their 
universal responsibility; 2) they will accept their absolute 
freedom that expands well beyond the professional boundaries; 
and simultaneously -as well as necessarily- 3) they will crusade 
for the freedom of others. It is, primarily, the responsibility of 
those who know the rules of the game to act following the 
freedom of others and act to raise their consciousness towards 
the plethora of the ontologically possible choices at hand and 
their responsibilities towards an open future. 
5 Conclusion 
Beauvoir’s and Sartre’s philosophical contribution lies in the 
unconditional rejection of the deontological connotation of 
ethics. For them, ethics is not an end; there can be no end in 
ethics. No one will ever reach a point of being ‘ethical’ for there 
can be neither an absolute aim nor a perpetual subjectivity 
enclosed and certified in the sphere of the given world. Ethics is, 
and will always be, a means towards our transcendence to 
freedom summoned on our choices regarding the life we want to 
pursue and the world we want to live in.  
In such a context, those who evangelize their ethical character 
and objectivity are nothing more than people confined in their 
'given world'; lured by the comfort of inevitability, they deny, 
either unconsciously or purposefully, the very possibility of a 
choice for their freedom and the freedom of others. But there 
would be no meaning in life if history were to be perceived as an 
inexorable and everlasting 'mechanical unrolling', and our 
existence as an object fulfilling itself just by fueling the engines 
of this perennial Sisyphean task. The only possible way to 
discuss and/or implement ethics with people that reject their 
subjectivity and their role in the world is through abstraction, 
and there is no point in doing so. Conversely, it can potentially 
lead to opposite results by providing people with a natural yet 
bad faith escape button to mantle their choices and stifle their 
transcendence. 
Regarded as a means, however, ethics becomes a way of 
pursuing your life. And like subjects, corporations can 
themselves decide to lead an ethical life. Beauvoir describes 
ethics as a 'game': 'the characteristic feature of all ethics is to 
consider human life as a game that can be won or lost and to 
teach man the means of winning'. Ethics is thus transformed in a 
way for the tech giants to present themselves to the world not as 
defenders of certain values but as subjects that strive to do the 
right thing in their daily life; by doing so they concurrently 
entreat everyone else to follow their lead. Ethics also lies in the 
way corporations regard the role of their employees and in the 
way they respect and raise the consciousness of their clients; But 
most of all, ethics is mirrored in the way certain entities respond 
to the challenge of achieving a better, sustainable and open to 
Ethics 
P. Terzis 
 
 
 
all, future. Corporations that want to walk through the 
strenuous pathway of ethics cannot but: 
1. review the ethics of their profit formulas and avoid the 
procrastination that limits the discussion within the fictional AI 
boundaries;   
2. be open, responsible and avoid the dishonest attempt to mask 
their true options either behind abstraction or under the 
mythical fallacy of inevitability; 
3. nurture a corporate environment that will prepare and 
embrace their employee’s autonomous transcendence and 
assumption of freedom and responsibility; 
Today, we are at a crossroads, awkwardly looking at various 
directions. The younger generation has no idea what it means to 
be offline and at the same time, the older generation finds it 
difficult to adapt old patterns to new virtual spaces. The 
technological evolution surpassed our ability to conceptually 
cope with its speed; reforming or adapting our thesis in the 
world has been an existentially puzzling task. We have 
gradually, unwillingly and unconsciously become large 
anonymized computational assets within an uncontrollably 
expanding and unsustainable world whose ecosystem struggles 
to maintain even the minimum balance. People discuss and write 
best-sellers on how technology reinvents what it means to be 
human, disregarding the fact that accepting such a mechanistic 
attitude as inevitable will eventually engineer a world where 
only the fittest, the reinvented, will survive. But if there is 
something that defined our existence in this world, it is that we 
built societies where the least fit could not only survive, but 
thrive. 
It is high time we realized our freedom. For this to happen, those 
who hold the keys to our future must take every possible step to 
re-establish themselves and the rest of us within our rights and 
help us restore our personal and collective sense of freedom. In a 
world where everyone is connected to others, my freedom 
springs from the freedom of my connections. There is no 
individual freedom here for there can be no individual digital 
sphere to connect to, no individual society to interact with and 
no individual Earth to live and prosper. It is time for the ‘one-
dimensional’ data subject either to become human again or to 
stay captive of its ‘given world’ and annihilate its existence to 
the vanity of a fictional inevitability. As long as an individual 
consciously and freely chooses one or the other, freedom shall 
flourish. For the process of transcendence, anguish is 
inescapable. It always is when we decide to lift ourselves to the 
consciousness of our freedom. Beyond that, there is no easy way 
out. There never was.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I sincerely thank all the anonymous reviewers whose comments 
helped me improve this paper. I also thank my PhD Supervisors, 
Dr Ben Sanders and Dr Emma Nottingham for their ongoing 
support as well as Dr Martina Hutton and the members of the 
Doctorate Roundtable 2019-2020 for their useful comments on an 
earlier version of the paper.   
 
REFERENCES
[1]  Philippe D’Anjou. 2011. An Ethics of Freedom for Architectural Design 
Practice. Journal of Architectural Education 64, 2, (March 2011), 141-147. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1531-314X.2010.01137.x   
[2] Simone de Beauvoir. 1947. The Ethics of Ambiguity (New ed. 2002) 
Kensington Publishing.  
[3] Simone de Beauvoir. 1965. The Force of Circumstance (New ed. 1987). Penguin 
Classics.  
[4] Alex Campolo, Madelyn Sanfilippo,  Meredith Whittaker, Kate Crawford. 2017. AI 
Now Report. Retrieved December 4, 2018 from: 
https://www.tagesspiegel.de/politik/eu-guidelines-ethics-washing-made-in-
europe/24195496.html  
[5]  Thomas Flynn. 2006. Existentialism: A very short introduction. Oxford 
University Press. 
[6]  Antonio Gramsci. 1935. Selections from the Prison Notebooks (New ed. 2005).  
Lawrence & Wishart Ltd 
[7]  Ben Green. 2018. Data Science as Political Action: Grounding Data Science in 
a Politics of Justice.  arXiv: arXiv:1811.03435. Retrieved from 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.03435v1  
[8] Martin Heidegger. 1927. Being and Time: A Revised Edition of 
the Stambaugh Translation. State University of New York Press.  
[9] Kevin T. Jackson. 2005. Towards Authenticity: A Sartrean Perspective on 
Business Ethics. Journal of Business Ethics 58, 1 (June 2005). 307-325   
[10] Herbert Marcuse. 1964. One-dimensional Man. Routledge & Kegan Paul 
Limited.  
[11] Thomas Metzinger. 2019. Ethics washing made in Europe (April 2019). 
Retrieved December 4, 2018 from: https://www.tagesspiegel.de/politik/eu-
guidelines-ethics-washing-made-in-europe/24195496.html  
[12]  Samir Passi and Solon Barocas. 2019. Problem Formulation and Fairness. In 
Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 
(FAT* '19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 39-48. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287567 
[13] Microsoft Research Blog. 2019. Guidelines for Human-AI interaction design,  
(February 2019), Retrieved December 4, 2018 from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/guidelines-for-human-ai-
interaction-design/  
[14] Jean-Paul Sartre. 1943. Being and Nothingness: An Essay on 
Phenomenological Ontology (2nd ed. 2003). Routledge.  
[15] Jean-Paul Sartre. 1946. Existentialism Is a Humanism. Public lecture given in 
1946. Retrieved December 4, 2019 from: 
http://www.mrsmoser.com/uploads/8/5/0/1/8501319/english_11_ib_-
_no_exit_-_existentialism_is_a_humanism_-_sartre.pdf   
[16] Andrew D. Selbst, Danah Boyd, Sorelle A. Friedler, Suresh 
Venkatasubramanian, and Janet Vertesi. 2019. Fairness and Abstraction in 
Sociotechnical Systems. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, 
Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* '19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 59-
68. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287598 
[17] Julia Powles and Helen Nissenbaum. 2018. The Seductive Diversion of 
‘Solving’ Bias in Artificial Intelligence (December 2018). Retrieved December 
4, 2018 from: https://onezero.medium.com/the-seductive-diversion-of-solving-
bias-in-artificial-intelligence-890df5e5ef53 
[18]  Edward Zalta (Ed.). 2017. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 
2017). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. URL: 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2017/entries/existentialism/ 
