Clear Sanctions, Vague Rewards: How China’s Social Credit System Currently Defines “Good” and “Bad” Behavior
Severin Engelmann*
engelmas@in.tum.de
Chair of Cyber Trust
Faculty of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
Mo Chen*
mo.chen@tum.de
Chair of Cyber Trust
Faculty of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
Felix Fischer+
felix.fischer@tum.de
Chair of Cyber Trust
Faculty of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
Ching-yu Kao
ching-yu.kao@aisec.fraunhofer.de
Fraunhofer Institute for Applied and
Integrated Security
Jens Grossklags
jens.grossklags@in.tum.de
Chair of Cyber Trust
Faculty of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
ABSTRACT
China’s Social Credit System (SCS,社会信用体系 or shehui xiny-
ong tixi) is expected to become the first digitally-implemented
nationwide scoring system with the purpose to rate the behavior of
citizens, companies, and other entities. Thereby, in the SCS, “good”
behavior can result in material rewards and reputational gain while
“bad” behavior can lead to exclusion from material resources and
reputational loss. Crucially, for the implementation of the SCS, so-
ciety must be able to distinguish between behaviors that result in
reward and those that lead to sanction. In this paper, we conduct
the first transparency analysis of two central administrative infor-
mation platforms of the SCS to understand how the SCS currently
defines “good” and “bad” behavior. We analyze 194,829 behavioral
records and 942 reports on citizens’ behaviors published on the
official Beijing SCS website and the national SCS platform “Credit
China”, respectively. By applying a mixed-method approach, we
demonstrate that there is a considerable asymmetry between in-
formation provided by the so-called Redlist (information on “good”
behavior) and the Blacklist (information on “bad” behavior). At the
current stage of the SCS implementation, the majority of explana-
tions on blacklisted behaviors includes a detailed description of the
causal relation between inadequate behavior and its sanction. On
the other hand, explanations on redlisted behavior, which comprise
positive norms fostering value internalization and integration, are
less transparent. Finally, this first SCS transparency analysis sug-
gests that socio-technical systems applying a scoring mechanism
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments. We appreciate the support
from the German Institute for Trust and Safety on the Internet (DIVSI).
* Severin Engelmann and Mo Chen equally contributed to this work.
+ Felix Fischer is also affiliated with Projects by IF, London.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
FAT* ’19, January 29–31, 2019, Atlanta, GA, USA
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6125-5/19/01. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287585
might use different degrees of transparency to achieve particular
behavioral engineering goals.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Social and professional topics → Government technology pol-
icy; • Information systems → Decision support systems; • Se-
curity and privacy → Social aspects of security and privacy; •
Applied computing → Anthropology;
KEYWORDS
Social Credit System, Socio-Technical Systems, Transparency, Be-
havioral Engineering.
ACM Reference Format:
Severin Engelmann*, Mo Chen*, Felix Fischer+, Ching-yu Kao, and Jens
Grossklags. 2019. Clear Sanctions, Vague Rewards: How China’s Social
Credit System Currently Defines “Good” and “Bad” Behavior. In FAT* ’19:
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* ’19), January
29–31, 2019, Atlanta, GA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287585
1 INTRODUCTION
Moral thinking and action necessarily depend on informational re-
sources. When an individual asks: “What is the right thing to do?”,
he or she essentially relies on information that renders a conclusion
morally justifiable. In philosophy and anthropology, descriptive
morality refers to how groups or societies negotiate codes of con-
duct (or norms) that are morally acceptable or unacceptable [8, 36].
As a consequence, an individual’s moral accountability tends to
be proportional to his or her knowledge of good and bad moral
behavior underlining the epistemic character of morality [7]. In
2014, the Chinese government issued a plan for a nationwide digital
scoring system known as the Chinese Social Credit System (SCS)
classifying behavior into morally “praise-” and “blameworthy” [29].
Thereby, all legal entities including companies and public institu-
tions (among others) receive an 18-digit ID called the Unified Social
Credit Code,1 which corresponds to the 18-digit ID card number for
1http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-06/17/content_9858.html, last accessed on
November 19, 2018.
Chinese citizens. Presumably, based on these IDs, the SCS will col-
lect and evaluate behavioral data and may assign scores that result
in material benefits and reputational praise or material exclusion
and reputational loss. Or, in the words of the Chinese government,
the goal of the SCS is to “allow the trustworthy to roam everywhere
under heaven while making it hard for the discredited to take a
single step” [21, 29].
But how can citizens, companies, and social institutions know
what behaviors are “good” and “bad” in the SCS? Put differently,
how transparent is the current SCS in providing information on
“good” and “bad” behaviors? Answering this question requires a
conceptualization of transparency. Here, we rely on the definition
proposed by Turilli and Floridi, which conceptualizes transparency
as “the choice of which information is to be made accessible to some
agents by an information provider”[30]. First, this definition distin-
guishes between an information provider, whichmakes information
accessible, in this context the Chinese government, and agents or
entities that depend on this information for their decision-making.
Secondly, this definition recognizes that information transparency
is an “ethically impairing or enabling factor when the information
disclosed has an impact on ethical principles”[30]. Both of these
components are highly relevant for the SCS since participants are
dependent on the information provided to make decisions that can
lead to reward or punishment.
Recently, the Chinese government has started issuing behavioral
information on several platforms (see Section 2 for more informa-
tion). In this empirical study, we review a subset of this behavioral
information released on two central SCS platforms: the official SCS
national website “Credit China” and its equivalent municipal outlet
“Credit China (Beijing)”.
On the former site, we collect and analyze 156 news reports about
“good” behaviors (we refer to as “positive” cases), and 789 equivalent
reports about “bad” behaviors (“negative” cases). In these “negative”
portraits, individuals are commonly stereotyped as so-called “Lao-
lai (老赖)” – the epitome of a financially dishonest individual in
China. Since all stories we collected are news reports about real-life
events portraying a morally “good” or “bad” individual, they all
include descriptive norms highlighting “desirable” and “undesirable”
characteristics of individuals in Chinese society today.
Next, on “Credit China (Beijing)”, we retrieve a large number
of records of “good” and “bad” behavior from the so-called Redlist
and Blacklist. Thus, our approach is as follows: first, we collect and
statistically analyze close to 200,000 Blacklist and Redlist records
from “beijing.gov.cn/creditbj”, the SCS’s information platform for
China’s capital, Beijing. Hence, based on machine learning topic
modeling andmanual text coding, we identify the common semantic
patterns of close to 1000 reports on “good” and “bad” behavior
published on the national SCS platform “www.creditchina.gov.cn”.
We show several informational asymmetries that characterize
the current degree of transparency of the governmental SCS’s infor-
mation platforms. Finally, we discuss how degrees of transparency
could correspond to different incentive strategies of socio-technial
systems that rate legal entities in society.
Our paper has the following structure. In Section 2, we discuss the
development of China’s SCS and review related work. In Section 3,
we present our data acquisition and data analysis approach. We
conduct our analysis in Sections 4 and 5. We discuss our results
and offer concluding remarks in Section 6.
2 BACKGROUND
The implementation of the SCS rests on at least three main factors:
First, lack of honesty and trust2 in Chinese society has become a
serious issue manifested in the numerous news reports about food
poisonings, chemical spills, financial and telecommunications fraud,
and academic dishonesty over the past two decades [13, 22]. It is
estimated that Chinese enterprises suffer from a loss of 600 billion
RMB (around 92 billion USD) per year due to dishonest activities3.
According to a survey conducted by Ipsos Public Affairs [14], “moral
decline” was regarded as the most serious issue in China in 2017.
47% of Chinese respondents ranked it as one of the top 3 greatest
concerns, while the same issue was only mentioned by 15% of total
respondents worldwide.
Secondly, China’s SCS is expected to boost the domestic economy.
The Chinese government hopes that the SCS will give millions of
Chinese citizens without a financial history access to credit and
investment opportunities in the domestic market. China has the
largest unbanked population in the world (in absolute numbers),
with more than 225 million citizens having no bank account [5]. So
far, only 320million Chinese citizens have a credit record4. However,
the sustainability of China’s economic growth partially depends on
an increase in domestic spending. Through the SCS, citizens could
apply for loans based on trustworthiness scores without having to
prove their financial creditworthiness.
Finally, in Chinese society, the concept of personal identity is
largely determined by Confucian principles [6, 32]. Accordingly,
personhood is supposed to extend from the private to the public
sphere thereby somewhat losing its private and public boundaries.
In other words, normative expectations on individuals hardly ac-
count for the distinction between a private and a public sphere.
The division between a private and a public persona is often con-
ceived as trying to be secretive as privacy is commonly conceived
as hiding something shameful [34]. In fact, until recently, privacy
was primarily protected under the right of reputation in Chinese
civil law [33]. At the same time, the public interest ranks highly in
Chinese civil law [3]: “private information protected from disclo-
sure refers to information that is irrelevant to the public interest
or to the interests of other persons.” However, while the Chinese
concept of privacy is evolving, it is expected to remain distinct from
other societies [18]. Overall, the introduction of the SCS is hardly
perceived as a privacy-violating system in Chinese society, which
is perhaps surprising from a Western perspective [16].
2.1 Current state of the SCS
At the current stage, the SCS remains fragmented, being developed
at national, provincial, municipal, and ministerial levels with no
clear unified structure. In the past years, provinces and cities have
2The characters “诚信 (chengxin)” literally mean both honesty and trust in Chinese.
3This information is included in the “Report on China’s Honesty Building Situation
(Zhongguo Chengxin Jianshe Zhuangkuang Baogao)”. The full report is not publicly
available, but parts of the report (in Chinese) are accessible through: http://society.
people.com.cn/n1/2016/0523/c1008-28370202.html, last accessed onNovember 19, 2018.
4See “Inspiration of the US Non-traditional Credit Information Mechanism” available
on the platform of “Credit China” at http://www.creditchina.gov.cn/zhengcefagui/
tashanzhishi1/201712/t20171207_98701.html, last accessed on November 19, 2018.
developed various prototype models for the SCS [17, 35]. Impor-
tantly, the SCS also takes companies, government departments and
judicial organizations as its targets [29]. This means that some com-
panies have a special role in the SCS. Since 2015, eight companies
were granted permission to run individual credit services with the
purpose to implement pilot SCS programs [23]. Individually, none
of the eight companies received a licence to continue individual
credit services after the two-year trial period ended in 2017. Instead,
together with the China Internet Finance Association (run by the
People’s Bank of China), they recently have become common share-
holders of a company called Baihang Credit, which received the
first credit scoring licence in February 2018.
2.2 Related Work
We are unaware of any research project that conducts a data-driven
analysis of the currently observable data practices of key sites of
China’s SCS. However, we have identified two empirical research
studies that help understand how the SCS is being communicated
and discussed by Chinese media [23], and how it is being perceived
by Chinese citizens [16].
Ohlberg et al. collected official Chinese news articles and public
communications, as well as social media postings on Chinese blogs,
forums, and bulletin board services about the SCS for a six-month
period in 2017 [23]. The largemajority of news articles has a positive
focus and highlight the SCS as a “cure-all for social and economic
problems”. Criticism is mostly aimed at the slow implementation
progress or directed at commercial initiatives in the SCS. Citizens’
social media postings rarely address privacy issues and rather focus
on how to game the system to achieve a higher social credit score
within commercial SCS applications. Of relevance to the latter point,
the implications of gamifying social credit are also being discussed
from a non-empirical perspective by other scholars [19, 24].
Kostka [16] conducted an online survey with about 2,200 Chi-
nese citizens that was distributed via different channels including
websites and apps. Due to the widespread internet surveillance
in China, the validity of such online surveys remains question-
able at least to some extent. According to her findings, about 80%
of the respondents have a positive perception of governmental
and commercial SCS initiatives. Interestingly, older and more edu-
cated respondents have a higher approval rating. In contrast, these
demographic factors are typically associated with higher privacy
concerns in Western societies (see, for example, [1]). Several policy
papers address the relationship between the SCS and the danger of
mass surveillance (e.g., [20]).
Finally, there is rigorous work on comparing financial credit
reporting systems [15], which, however, predates the emergence
of the SCS in China and focuses on the financial aspects of credit
reporting. Likewise, privacy considerations concerning private enti-
ties facilitating credit and background reporting have, for example,
been explored by Hoofnagle [12].
2.3 Ethical Issues
Our analysis is built on publicly available data from key sites of
China’s SCS, which is posted with the intent of public scrutiny. Our
paper includes screenshots from the currently available implemen-
tations. We have blurred any personally identifiable data.
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Number of Topics
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
Co
he
re
nc
e 
Sc
or
e
Negative
Positive
Figure 1: Coherence score Cv for topic models of negative and pos-
itive case studies using different topic counts.
3 METHODS
We used computer-assisted content analysis methods to explore the
level of transparency of current behavioral information published
on the two previously mentioned SCS websites. First, the column-
and-row structured records of both the Blacklist and the Redlist on
the SCS’s Beijing platform5 were crawled and statistically evaluated.
Hence, to understand the semantic and structural patterns of both
“positive” and “negative” case studies, we crawled news reports on
“bad” behavior labeled as “Typical Cases (典型案例)”6 and on “good”
behavior labeled as “Stories of Integrity (诚信人物/故事)” under
the section of “Integrity Culture (诚信文化)”7on the national SCS
information platform “Credit China”8. We then applied statistical
topic modeling based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to all
available 156 news reports on “good” behavior (“positive” cases) and
789 news reports on “bad” behavior (“negative” cases) on August
12, 2018.
We preprocessed the downloaded documents by applying jieba9
for segmentation and stopword filtering of Chinese text. We used
the stopword corpus compiled by the Chinese search engine Baidu10.
After tokenization of the given text, we applied tf-idf to re-weigh
term counts. As we had no reasonable expectation for the num-
ber of topics k to be detected within the given document corpus,
we performed optimal topic number search. Thereby, we created
several LDA models for “positive” and “negative” case studies and
calculated the topic coherence measures Cv as proposed in [25].
We started with k = 2 and increased the number of topics until an
upper bound of k = 40. As shown in Figure 1, coherence values
of models for both document sets increased until k = 15 before
flattening out. Therefore, we investigated the top-30 most salient
terms for each of the fifteen topics produced by these models [4].
Thereby, we set δ = 0.6 within the applied relevance metric [28].
5http://www.creditbj.gov.cn/xyData/front/creditService/initial.shtml%20?typeId=4.
6https://www.creditchina.gov.cn/home/dianxinganli1/?navPage=6.
7https://www.creditchina.gov.cn/chengxinwenhua/chengxingushi/.
8https://www.creditchina.gov.cn/.
9https://github.com/fxsjy/jieba.
10http://www.baiduguide.com/baidu-stopwords.
Figure 2: Three lists publishing records of “negative” behavior: from
left to right, the first arrow points to Blacklist, the second arrow to
Special Attention List, and the third arrow to Administrative Pun-
ishment.
Moreover, we also reviewed the results for k = 10, k = 20, and
k = 30 in order to further manually verify the optimal topic number.
We found the optimal model with k = 10 for both “positive” and
“negative” cases. Finally, we further selected 5 main topics for the
“positive” cases and 7 topics for the “negative” cases (see Table 3 in
the Supplementary Materials for topics selected for the “positive”
cases, and Table 4 in the Supplementary Materials for “negative”
case topics).
Based on our topic modeling results, we selected the 4 most re-
lated cases (highest predicted probability of belonging to the topic)
for each of the topics.11 We then manually analyzed 20 “positive”
cases and 26 “negative” cases12 in detail. One author first reviewed
5 “positive” and 5 “negative” cases, respectively, and drafted a cod-
ing guide, which was then reviewed iteratively by another author,
refined, and retested to generate consistent definitions. As a result,
we developed two coding schemes for “positive” and “negative”
cases (see Table 1 for the coding scheme applied to “positive” cases
and see Table 2 for the coding scheme used to analyze “negative”
cases). After reliability was established, we examined all 46 cases
for structural and thematic commonalities. Each coding sheet con-
tained the information from one “positive” or “negative” case. Once
the coding sheets were completed, we grouped and analyzed the
information contained in them.
4 RESULTS
4.1 Blacklists
On the platform of “Credit China (Beijing)”, we found three publicly
accessible databases providing information on “bad” behavior, all
of which could be queried by search term. Translated from Chi-
nese (see Figure 2), they were termed the following: 1) Blacklist
(1,137,546 entries), 2) Special Attention List (9,229,179 entries), and
3) Administrative Punishment (14,885,789 entries).
The Blacklist further contained 16 subcategories for “bad” be-
havior. For the Blacklist, we crawled two of these subcategories,
one containing records of individuals that have been banned from
11For “negative” cases, there are only three cases for Topic 6 (measures taken against
crime) and Topic 7 (public transport regulation violation), respectively.
12There were only 3 cases for 2 out of the 7 topics.
Pattern Definition Example
Bio-info full name 今年70岁的刘某某，为了一句诺
言，一辈子踏踏实实做一名“小村
大医生”。
age 古亭村77岁的老人蓝某某为了归还
欠银行的一笔500元死账。
living place 蓝某某出生在遂昌县云峰街道古亭
村。
profession 这位一天两次捡到钱包的“好运
人”就是蒙阴一中的的英语教师耿
某某。
Social class low 一个清贫的普通农家，父亲、儿
子、孙女毫无怨言地赡养一位无任
何血缘关系的“外人”。
middle 陈某的妻子说，他们家里也就是普
通家庭，上有老下有小。
high 这句话时常在内蒙古明泽集团董事
长王某某的心里翻腾着。
Sacrifice for
the common
interest
material sac-
rifice
他隔天检查药柜，受潮的药直接销
毁，损失的药费自己承担。
non-material
sacrifice
每天为他做三餐，每天打针吃药，
就连端屎端尿的活也揽下来。
Rewards reputational
rewards
他被评为全国农村青年创业致富带
头人、北京市优秀农村实用人才。
material
reward
refusal
钱包的主人一个劲地要给她塞钱。
肖某某坚决地拒绝了。
Virtue
cascade
trustworthy
and honest
为了不让养殖户遭受损失，彭某某
把风险留给自己，仍按照回收合同
原价收回了养殖户的肉鸭。
hardworking 虽然有时一天连饭都顾不上吃，还
帮助菜农一起装菜卸菜，忙到了深
夜还要了解市场信息、掌握蔬菜的
价格趋向。
self-
discipline
虽然银行减免并注销了这笔贷款，
但放在我私人账户的钱一定要还
上。
helpful 积极参加协会组织的慰问残疾人、
资助贫困大学生活动。
care-taking 他们一家三代几十年如一日地照顾
着丁某某老人。
sense of re-
sponsibility
她以当好水资源质量的守望者为己
任。
Table 1: Coding scheme for “positive” cases. All “positive” cases in-
cluded biographical information of the individual and indicated his
or her social class. Other codes described the individual’s sacrifice
for the common interest, the rewards obtained, and the further at-
tribution of other virtues (virtue cascade).
Pattern Definition Example
Bio-info anonymous
(for individuals,
surname only)
当宁陵县法院执行干警在被执行人
郭某家的楼顶将其抓获时，郭某无
奈地低下了头。
anonymous (com-
pany name not
provided)
原告北京某装饰工程有限公司为被
告北京某文化有限公司所有的房屋
进行建设、装修。
Imple-
menting
Agency
the court 海淀法院3月6日出动执行法官、法
警等共计50余人，对15起案件进行
集中强制执行。
Public Security
Bureau
华龙区法院的执行法官远赴拉萨，
与当地公安机关通力合作。
telecommunica-
tion company
由商南法院向中国移动、联通、电
信三大通信运营公司出具协助执行
通知书，对失信被执行人实行彩铃
和短信曝光。
Causes
for pun-
ishment
refusing to repay
individuals
当地法院判决吕某赔偿梦某医疗
费、残疾赔偿金等损失46万元。吕
某拒不履行赔偿义务，甚至远走他
乡。
refusing to repay
banks
岫岩法院判决某食用菌公司偿还银
行贷款本金380万元及相应利息。判
决生效后，食用菌公司一直没有履
行。
refusing to repay
companies
原告北京某装饰工程有限公司为被
告北京某文化有限公司所有的房屋
进行建设、装修，施工结束后，被
告拖欠原告工程款400余万元。
Reasons
to fulfill
obliga-
tions
actions taken by
the court
在中牟法院执行干警的全力配合
下，成功将被执行人吕某拘留。
threatened to be
placed on Black-
list
法院将肖某纳入了“老赖”名单
里，将他的大头照向社会公布。
Table 2: Coding scheme for “negative” cases. All cases provided
anonymized biographical information, an entity implementing the
punishment, justification of the punishment, and descriptions on
why the obligations were fulfilled in the end.
participating in the securities market (Securities Market Entry Pro-
hibition, 422 entries) and one listing companies with debts (Black-
list of Company Debtors, 1,116,707 entries = 98.2% of all Blacklist
entries). For the Blacklist of individuals, all 422 entries included
extensive explanations for the punishment (e.g., length of ban) ref-
erencing financial law (see Figure 3). Apart from the censored ID
card number, the full names of all individuals were published.
Due to the large amount of company records we found on the
Blacklist, the Special Attention List, and Administrative Punish-
ment, we crawled the first 1000 pages for these lists. For the Blacklist
of companies with financial debt, this resulted in a total of 131,485
entries all of which featured information on why an entity had
been blacklisted (see Figure 4). Out of these 131,485 entries, 128,006
entries specified that the financial obligation had not been fulfilled
Figure 3: An entry from the Blacklist of “Securities Market Entry
Prohibition”. The first column, from top to down: the first arrow
points to “name of punishment” and the second points to “content
of punishment”. The table on the right side of the second arrow
shows the detailed explanation of the punishment.
Figure 4: The top 5 reasons for being on the Blacklist of company
debtors.
at the time of crawling (corresponding field not shown). Entries
included a reference to legal regulation and specified the full name
of the company (see Figure 5). Note that some companies listed
had multiple entries corresponding to multiple breaches. Together
with these explanations, we crawled the date of publication on the
Blacklist for each entry. We found that on one day in June 2018,
95.6% of all entries (125,747) had been published on the Blacklist for
companies (see Figure 6). This probably indicates that these records
had already been collected and processed by another entity before
being transferred to and published on the Blacklist.
For the Special Attention List, we collected 30,625 entries con-
taining information on companies that had violated business op-
eration regulations. For all records collected, companies had been
blacklisted for providing various types of false information to the
authorities (see Figure 7).
Finally, our crawler returned 32,719 entries for the Adminis-
trative Punishment register that contained information on both
Figure 5: Screenshot of a company’s Blacklist entry. Left column,
the first arrow points to a field explaining the specific context of
the case, the second arrow points to the date of publication of this
entry on the Blacklist.
Figure 6: Publication dates of Blacklist entries for company debtors.
individuals and companies (see Figure 8). As Figure 9 shows, the
majority of records of the Administrative Punishment register re-
ported traffic rule violations.
Correspondingly, fines were the most widely used measure (see
Figure 10). We also found that only company entries of the Adminis-
trative Punishment register and the Blacklist consistently featured
the Unified Social Credit Code.
On the national SCS information platform “China Credit”, we
found another Blacklist issued by the Civil Aviation Administration
of China (中国民用航空局)13. This list, which is updated every
month, publishes information on individuals that are excluded
from aircraft travel for a period of one year due to misbehavior on
airplanes or airports (data collected on August 10, 2018; see Figure
11). According to the list published in August, 2018, 946 individuals
were banned from air travel for one year. Among others, the list
provided full name, censored ID number, and explanations why
individuals had been punished (see three arrows in the first row of
Figure 11). Being banned from air travel resulted from taking illegal
objects on airplanes, smoking on airplanes, or boarding airplanes
13https://hmd.creditchina.gov.cn/, last accessed on November 5, 2018.
Figure 7: The top 5 reasons for companies to be on the Special At-
tention List.
Figure 8: A record of the Administrative Punishment register. The
first column, from top to down: the first arrow points to the field
"type of punishment" and the second points to the field "reasons
for punishment".
Figure 9: The top 5 reasonswhy individuals or companies are placed
on the Administrative Punishment register.
Figure 10: The 5 types of Administrative Punishments.
with a fake passport. The figure also indicates that the list contained
names and ID numbers of non-Chinese citizens providing some
evidence that foreigners were not excluded from the SCS.
4.2 Redlist
We found one type of list documenting information on “good” be-
havior - the Redlist. It contained a total of 1,206,944 entries dis-
tributed across 24 categories (3 categories for redlisted individuals,
21 categories for redlisted companies). The categories for individ-
uals, translated from Chinese, are: 1) Taxi Star (1557 entries), 2)
Top Ten Tour Guides (14 entries), and 3) Five-Star Volunteer (603
entries). For all entries, the full name of the person and his or her
partially censored ID number were given. The Five-Star Volunteer
category displayed the gender of the person as well as the amount
of volunteering hours carried out per person. The lowest amount of
volunteering hours documented was 1500 (which was probably the
necessary threshold to be listed) and the highest was 25,400. None
of the entries we collected from the Redlist provided an explana-
tion justifying why such a honorary title had been awarded to that
person (see Figure 13). Thus, we cannot report any observations
about justifications on “good” behavior from our Beijing Redlist
analysis.
Company categories referred either to tax awards (e.g., A Class
Taxpayer) or to other honorable statuses such as Harmonious La-
bor Relations or Excellent Contributor to Developing Chinese So-
cialism. Just like the Redlist entries of individuals, there were no
justifications explaining why a honorable title had been awarded
to a company. No Redlist entry contained the Unified Social Credit
Code. Generally, Figure 13 shows a single record of an entity that
can display several “positive” and “negative” entries. Thus, there is
reason to believe that the interface shown in Figure 13 functions as
the governmental SCS information template: recording and making
transparent information on rewards and/or sanctions to the public.
Importantly, every Blacklist and Redlist record we collected fea-
tured a “Disagreement/Correction (异议/纠错)” function (see Fig-
ure 12). This function allowed citizens to object to a Blacklist or
Redlist decision by providing a statement of up to 2000 Chinese
characters (submission required 18-digit ID number).
4.3 Coding results for “positive” cases on
“good” behavior
News reports on “good” behavior were introduced as “Stories of
Integrity (诚信人物/故事)” posted under the section of “Integrity
Culture (诚信文化)” on the national SCS information platform
“Credit China”. All of the 20 “positive” cases selected described how
a protagonist sacrificed his or her self-interest (both material and
non-material) for the common good. Moreover, all cases centered
on “trustworthiness” and “honesty” as key SCS virtues. The stories
all followed the same narrative structure: they first provided de-
tailed biographical information of a person (full name, social class,
profession, family status), followed by a dilemma: the protagonist
could either engage in “dishonest” behavior winning him or her
an immediate small reward or get a large future reward by being
“honest”. Once the person had enacted the “honest” behavior, which
happened in all the “positive” reports we analyzed, the narratives
ended with a virtue cascade.
Take, for example, cases in which individuals found and returned
lost property to an owner. Here, all four cases assigned to the
topic“return lost property to owner” ended by further attributing
“self-discipline”, “helpfulness”, “care-taking for others”, and a “sense
of responsibility” to the protagonist as part of a virtue cascade.
Another commonality across the selected cases was that all protag-
onists were morally “praised” by their social environment. Also,
the protagonist was recognized for his or her “good” behavior by
official agencies or the media in the form of “honors”, “decorations”,
or a “cute nickname”. On the other hand, when a material reward
was offered for the “good” behavior, as in all cases with topics
“family and community relationship and repayment”, “return lost
property to owner”, and “social entrepreneurship to help people
out of poverty”, the protagonist refused the material reward at all
times.
4.4 Coding results for “negative” cases on “bad”
behavior
Reports about “bad” behavior were labeled as “Typical Cases (典
型案例)” on the homepage of “Credit China” with the sources be-
ing both local newspapers and the platform itself. The 26 selected
“negative” cases relating to 7 topics all revolved around one com-
mon theme, the “Laolai (老赖)”: a term specifically referring to
individuals and companies refusing to repay debts. These cases
were presented in two ways. The 4 cases with the topic “public
shaming” were about the courts’ actions in solving repayment prob-
lems. The remainder of the stories were about specific individuals
or companies. All individuals and companies were anonymous in
the selected cases. Local courts collaborated with local telecommu-
nication companies in all 4 cases with the topic “public shaming”,
and the Public Security Bureau played an important enforcement
role in all cases with topic “public transport regulation violation”.
In these reports, both the compulsory actions taken by the court
and the threat of being placed on the Blacklist forced the “Laolai” to
fulfill the stated obligation. Generally, both “positive” and “negative”
case studies we analyzed were homogeneous in structure, framing,
and content. This could indicate that they had been deliberately
formulated to propagate the SCS’s conceptualization of “good” and
“bad” behavior.
Figure 11: A screenshot of the Blacklist for individuals that are banned from flying on commercial airplanes. In the first row, from left to
right, the first arrow points a field containing the full name of the individual; the second to censored ID number; and the third to explanations
why individuals have been punished. Two arrows at the bottom left indicate entries of two foreign passengers.
Figure 12: Example of a company’s Blacklist entry. The black circle
on the upright corner indicates the “Disagreement/Correction (异
议/纠错)” function.
5 ANALYSIS
The results of our content analysis demonstrate that there are cur-
rently multiple informational asymmetries in both datasets.
5.1 Listed companies versus listed individuals
Currently, companies make up the majority of entries on both
the Blacklist and Redlist of Beijing’s SCS platform. We found that
companies which are involved in the construction of the SCS were
also included in the list. For instance, Alibaba (with Zhima Credit)
and Tencent (with Tencent Credit) were both granted permission
to start individual pilot credit service programs in 2015 and have
provided digital data collected from online shopping and social
media to the SCS. Both Alibaba and Tencent were listed as A-level
Taxpayers on the Redlist. Since we only crawled the Beijing SCS
platform, we cannot make any claims about the transparency of
other SCS Blacklist and Redlist websites.
Our analysis of “positive” and “negative” cases demonstrates the
opposite: here, the majority of reports on either “good” or “bad”
behavior focuses on individuals’ behaviors. For our manually coded
sample, only 15.4% of “negative” reports and 30.0% of “positive”
reports featured companies. In both “negative” and “positive” cases
that featured companies, however, reports centered on the person
in charge of the company typically highlighting the CEO’s virtues
and vices. In other words, it is not the company as such that is
“blamed” or “praised,” but rather the person responsible for the
company. Such portraits, therefore, signal that individuals are not
shielded by large institutions but can be made responsible for their
“good” or “bad” decision-making.
5.2 Justifying punishments versus justifying
rewards
All entries of the Blacklist explain why a person or company is
currently registered on the Blacklist. Moreover, Blacklist explana-
tions include legal terms and refer to laws and regulations. In other
words, Blacklist explanations make transparent the mechanism
of punishment by specifying a causal link between behavior and
consequence. This is perhaps best illustrated by the Blacklist on
individuals excluded from air travel (see Figure 11). The legal threat
contained in the entries of the Blacklist could furthermore signal
that a specific “dishonest” behavior can be detected and sanctioned.
On the other hand, not a single entry of the Redlist includes
a formulated explanation on why a person or company has been
awarded a honorary title. We found that fulfilling legal obligations
(Class A Taxpayer), performing professional (Taxi Star) or volun-
teering (Five-Star Volunteer) duties can result in reputational gain
in the current SCS. However, the mechanisms or criteria determin-
ing when an individual or a company secures a place on the Redlist
are not further explained. Taken together, the current SCS makes
behaviors leading to punishments more transparent than behaviors
Figure 13: Example of a Redlist entry for an individual with the honorary title Five-Star Volunteer. The record does not justify why the
honorary title was awarded.
resulting in rewards. More generally, our study could not identify
publicly available information associating specific behaviors to a
scoring or rating mechanism.
5.3 Types of punishments versus types of
incentives
The most common reason for a company to be placed on any of
the “negative” lists is failure to pay back debt (the second most
common reason is informational misconduct). Failure to pay back
debt is also the most prominent reason given for why protagonists
of the “negative” cases are registered on the Blacklist. The Chinese
term for “Laolai” appeared 481 times in the 789 “negative” reports
we collected. All “negative” stories we manually coded report on
the activities of a “Laolai” person (either as an individual or as
the legal representative of a company). In terms of punishment,
individuals and companies face both the material loss specified in
the corresponding legal regulation as well as the consequences of
being publicly shamed on the Blacklist. In more than 40% of the
narratives on “negative” behavior, an individual is threatened to be
placed on the Blacklist leading to the immediate compliance of the
individual.
On the other hand, individuals and companies on the Redlist
receive moral “approval” and reputational gain. Similarly, “positive”
cases report on individuals that gain reputational rewards, while
at the same time rejecting material incentives when offered as a
consequence of their “role-model” behavior. Still, being listed on
the Redlist is not mentioned or even indicated by any individuals
as a motivational factor for their behaviors. All stories we analyzed
emphasize that a morally “praiseworthy” activity is “praiseworthy”
when it is “genuinely” moral rather than instrumental in obtaining a
material reward. Furthermore, all “positive” stories feature a virtue
cascade: once an individual is described as “genuinely honest” or
“trustworthy”, he or she is attributed other “positive” virtues as a
consequence.
6 DISCUSSION & CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this first study of key websites of the Chinese SCS, our goal was
to understand how transparent the SCS currently is in providing
information on “good” and “bad” behavior. To this end, we collected
and analyzed 194,829 Blacklist and Redlist entries from the Beijing
SCS website “beijing.gov.cn/creditbj” and applied a machine learn-
ing topic modeling algorithm to almost 1000 reports on “positive”
and “negative” behavior crawled from the national SCS information
platform “www.creditchina.gov.cn”. Finally, we manually coded a
sample of these texts to understand what kind of specific behavioral
information they contain.
The main question arising from our findings, we believe, is
whether the degree of the current SCS’s transparency is inten-
tionally engineered or whether it is simply a manifestation of work
in progress. Is there a purpose in explicitly describing and publish-
ing the causal link between behavior and sanction while leaving
information on getting rewards deliberately vague? First, the asym-
metries in information provided between the Redlist and the Black-
list could be motivated economically: while an infinite amount of
people can be excluded from valuable material resources, only a
finite amount can be given valuable resources (e.g., a first-class train
ticket). Detailed instructions on how to win rewards could there-
fore lead to distribution problems since many individuals could
implement them. On the other hand, another explanation for the
current informational asymmetries of the SCS might be that already
existing records of legal offenses were used to start filling Blacklists.
Consequently, these records entail more justifications since they
refer to specific legal articles or regulations.
The degree of transparency of the SCS observed in this work
could also be motivated by behavioral engineering goals. Let’s imag-
ine for the moment the system were completely inscrutable (i.e., the
system did not justify a score increase or decrease and eventually a
given punishment or reward, respectively). In this case, individuals
would have little possibility to understand when the SCS rewarded
and when it sanctioned specific types of behaviors. Moreover, be-
sides being oblivious to the moral code of conduct, individuals
would not have the ability to contest the system’s decision-making
process (again, to negotiate a norm one must have the necessary
epistemic resources to do so). Note that this issue is also debated in
the context of the “Right to Explanation” of the European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation [27, 31]. A fully transparent
scoring system, on the other hand, would precisely map behaviors
to rewards or sanctions. Indeed, in the context of a nationwide
digitally-implemented scoring system, full transparency must ac-
count for the mechanism that leads to the distribution of rewards
or sanctions. This degree of transparency would offer individuals
the possibility to understand the system’s decision-making proce-
dures at least to a certain extent. In our analysis of SCS Blacklist
and Redlist records, we did not identify an explicit SCS scoring
mechanism. We have shown, however, that the SCS already enables
citizens to dispute single Blacklist and Redlist records. On the other
hand, a fully transparent SCS would possibly create other prob-
lems: if the SCS became fully transparent in regard to its scoring
mechanisms, complying to a norm would likely become a market
transaction. In fact, research on intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
suggests that introducing an external reward to a norm-guided
behavior turns this behavior into a commodity that can be bought
[10, 11]. This phenomenon, termed “crowding-out effect”, results
in fewer people engaging in this behavior since the consequences
of failing to act can simply be compensated by financial means
[2, 9, 26]. For example, if one reliably receives monetary compen-
sation for being honest, being honest will no longer be evaluated
as a moral behavior for both the actor and the recipient. As this
line of research suggests, individuals will likely stop attributing a
genuine moral character to individuals with a high score in a fully
transparent SCS.
Our analysis provides evidence that the currently implemented
SCS possibly attempts to counter such a transformation of moral
behavior into market transactions. All of the “positive” case studies
unambiguously emphasize that norm conformity is “good” because
it is “morally valuable” for both average citizens as well as CEOs.
None of the Redlist entries describe a connection between moral
behavior and external material reward. Rather, they contain virtue
signals and reputational gains by awarding symbolic honorary ti-
tles (e.g., Five-Star Volunteer). On another sub-page of the national
SCS website, we found the publication of 32 ancient Chinese fables
(not shown) also promoting self-concepts comprising virtues of
being a morally “good” Chinese citizen. In contrast, our analysis on
the corpus of “negative” case studies demonstrates the propagation
of a “negative” self-concept (“Laolai”) attributable to a specific of-
fense (i.e., intentionally not paying back debt). Taken together, our
analysis suggests that degrees of transparency can serve different
behavioral engineering goals in the context of a digital scoring
system.
REFERENCES
[1] Alessandro Acquisti and Jens Grossklags. 2005. Privacy and rationality in indi-
vidual decision making. IEEE Security & Privacy 3, 1 (2005), 26–33.
[2] Roland Bénabou and Jean Tirole. 2006. Incentives and prosocial behavior. Ameri-
can Economic Review 96, 5 (2006), 1652–1678.
[3] Yongxi Chen and Anne Cheung. 2017. The transparent self under big data
profiling: Privacy and Chinese legislation on the Social Credit System. The
Journal of Comparative Law 12, 2 (2017), 356–378.
[4] Jason Chuang, Christopher Manning, and Jeffrey Heer. 2012. Termite: Visu-
alization techniques for assessing textual topic models. In Proceedings of the
International Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces. ACM, 74–77.
[5] Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, Saniya Ansar, and Jake Hess.
2018. The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the
Fintech Revolution. The World Bank.
[6] Charles Ess. 2006. Ethical pluralism and global information ethics. Ethics and
Information Technology 8, 4 (2006), 215–226.
[7] Luciano Floridi. 2013. The Ethics of Information. Oxford University Press.
[8] Bernard Gert and Joshua Gert. 2017. The definition of morality. In The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward N. Zalta (Ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University.
[9] Uri Gneezy, Stephan Meier, and Pedro Rey-Biel. 2011. When and why incentives
(don’t) work to modify behavior. Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, 4 (2011),
191–210.
[10] Uri Gneezy and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. A fine is a price. The Journal of Legal
Studies 29, 1 (2000), 1–17.
[11] Uri Gneezy and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. Pay enough or don’t pay at all. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 3 (2000), 791–810.
[12] Chris Hoofnagle. 2003. Big Brother’s little helpers: How ChoicePoint and other
commercial data brokers collect and package your data for law enforcement.
North Carolina Journal of International Law and Commercial Regulation 29 (2003),
595–637.
[13] Yanzhong Huang. 2012. Why is not there a bottom line for food security issue in
China (Zhongguo Shipin Anquan Weihe Meiyou Dixian?) (in Chinese). https:
//cn.nytimes.com/opinion/20120821/c21huang/
[14] Ipsos Public Affairs. 2017. What worries the world? https://www.ipsos.com/
sites/default/files/2017-08/What_worries_the_world-July-2017.pdf.
[15] Nicola Jentzsch. 2006. The Economics and Regulation of Financial Privacy: An
International Comparison of Credit Reporting Systems. Springer Science & Business
Media.
[16] Genia Kostka. 2018. China’s Social Credit Systems and Public Opinion: Explaining
High Levels of Approval. Technical Report. Free University of Berlin. Available
on SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3215138.
[17] Jianzhou Liu. 2011. Building the Social Credit System: The content, the model, and
the trajectory (Shehui Xinyong Tixi Jianshe: Neihan, Moshi yu Lujing Xuanze;
in Chinese). Journal of the Party School of the Central Committee of the C.P.C. 15,
3 (2011), 50–53.
[18] Yao-Huai Lü. 2005. Privacy and data privacy issues in contemporary China.
Ethics and Information Technology 7, 1 (2005), 7–15.
[19] Andrzej Marczewski. 2017. The Ethics of Gamification. XRDS 24, 1 (2017), 56–59.
[20] Mirjam Meissner and Jost Wübbeke. 2016. IT-backed authoritarianism: Infor-
mation technology enhances central authority and control capacity under Xi
Jinping. China’s Core Executive: Leadership Styles, Structures and Processes under
Xi Jinping (2016), 52–57.
[21] Simina Mistreanu. 2018. Life inside China’s Social Credit laboratory:
The party’s massive experiment in ranking and monitoring Chinese cit-
izens has already started. https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/04/03/
life-inside-chinas-social-credit-laboratory/.
[22] Nature. 2018. China sets a strong example on how to address scientific fraud.
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-05417-1
[23] Mareike Ohlberg, Shazeda Ahmed, and Bertram Lang. 2018. Central Plan-
ning, Local Experiments: The Complex Implementation of China’s Social
Credit System. https://www.merics.org/en/microsite/china-monitor/
central-planning-local-experiments.
[24] Zahy Ramadan. 2018. The gamification of trust: The case of China’s “Social
Credit”. Marketing Intelligence & Planning 36, 1 (2018), 93–107.
[25] Michael Röder, Andreas Both, and Alexander Hinneburg. 2015. Exploring the
space of topic coherence measures. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. ACM, 399–408.
[26] Richard Ryan and Edward Deci. 2000. Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic
definitions and new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology 25, 1 (2000),
54–67.
[27] Andrew Selbst and Julia Powles. 2017. Meaningful information and the right to
explanation. International Data Privacy Law 7, 4 (2017), 233–242.
[28] Carson Sievert and Kenneth Shirley. 2014. LDAvis: A method for visualizing
and interpreting topics. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Interactive Language
Learning, Visualization, and Interfaces. 63–70.
[29] State Council. 2014. Notice of the State Council on Issuing the Outline of the
Plan for Building a Social Credit System (2014-2020); (in Chinese). http://www.
gov.cn/zhengce/content/2014-06/27/content_8913.htm.
[30] Matteo Turilli and Luciano Floridi. 2009. The ethics of information transparency.
Ethics of Information Technology (2009), 105–112.
[31] Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Luciano Floridi. 2017. Why a right to
explanation of automated decision-making does not exist in the General Data
Protection Regulation. International Data Privacy Law 7, 2 (2017), 76–99.
[32] Pak-Hang Wong. 2012. Dao, harmony and personhood: Towards a Confucian
ethics of technology. Philosophy & Technology 25, 1 (2012), 67–86.
[33] Yanfang Wu, Tuenyu Lau, David Atkin, and Carolyn Lin. 2011. A comparative
study of online privacy regulations in the US and China. Telecommunications
Policy 35, 7 (2011), 603–616.
[34] Jinghong Xu. 2015. Evolving legal frameworks for protecting the right to Internet
privacy in China. China and Cybersecurity: Espionage, Strategy, and Politics in the
Digital Domain (2015), 242–259.
[35] Zhiling Zhao and Feng Ding. 2007. Shanghai, Zhejiang, Shenzhen Social Credit
System models, problems and revelation (Shanghai, Zhejiang, Shenzhen Shehui
Xinyong Tixi Jianshe Moshi, Wenti yu Qishi) (in Chinese). Wei Shi 10 (2007),
70–73.
[36] Jarrett Zigon. 2008. Morality: An Anthropological Perspective. Berg.
